Summary We examined the energy expenditure in ice-hockey players under conditions of a model training match. The results were obtained in a group of 13 players of the national representative team (age 24.4 years), and in 1 goaler. In the players we also followed the physical fitness by means of a loading experiment on bicycle ergometer in the middle of the racing season, and before the opening of the World Championship 1971. The principial results are as follows: the energy expenditure during the play is 0.48 kcal/min·kg (3137% BMR), the oxygen debt 6.3 1. The anaerobic part of the metabolism is approximately two thirds of the total energy expenditure. The average heart rate during the activity on ice was 152 beats per minute, the pulmonary ventilation 92 1, the oxygen uptake 32 ml/min·kg. During one turn (1.17 min) the players covered the distance 285 m. The comparison of maximum values of the indices obtained by ergometrical examination in two examinations did not show any substancial differences. We can assume that the decrease observed in several indices may have been caused by a low motivation at loading up to the maximum (the lactic acid, pulmonary ventilation, oxygen uptake). Other findings (the fat percentage increment) can be explained by a less intensive training, unbalance between performance and nutrition. A relatively independent index is the W 170 which has shown the unchanged level of cardiorespiratory functions. From the results various conclusions can be drawn for the work of trainers. The ice-hockey proves to be an activity with mostly submaximal metabolic rate, where appears a great part of anaerobic metabolism simultaneously with high requirements for the aerobic metabolism. For the training practice the requirements follow to intensify the interval training, to increase the play intensity in the training, to use the necessary number of play exercises requiring the typical anaerobic power, and to load the players, in the preparatory period, more often by endurance activities for the aerobic endurance be developed.