Abstract The design of erasure correcting codes and their decoding algorithms is now at the point where capacity achieving codes are available with decoding algorithms that have complexity that is linear in the number of information symbols. One aspect of these codes is that the overhead (number of coded symbols beyond the number of information symbols required to achieve decoding completion with high probability) is linear in k. This work considers a new class of random codes which have the following advantages: (i) the overhead is constant (in the range of 5 to 10), independent of the number of data symbols being encoded (ii) the probability of completing decoding for such an overhead is essentially one (iii) the codes are effective for a number of information symbols as low as a few tens (iv) the only probability distribution required is the uniform distribution. The price for these properties is that the decoding complexity is greater, on the order of k 3/2. However, for the lower values of k where these codes are of particular interest, this increase in complexity might be outweighed by their advantages. The parity check matrices of these codes are chosen at random as windowed matrices, i.e. for each column an initial starting position of a window of length w is chosen and the succeeding w positions are chosen at random as zero or one. It can be shown that it is necessary that w=O(k 1/2) for the probabilistic matrix rank properties to behave as a non-windowed random matrix. The sufficiency of the condition has so far been established by extensive simulation, although other arguments strongly support this conclusion. The properties of the codes described depend heavily on the rank properties of random matrices over finite fields. Known results on such matrices are briefly reviewed and several conjectures needed in the discussion of the code properties, are stated. The likelihood of the validity of the conjectures is supported through extensive experimentation. Mathematical proof of the conjectures would be of great value for their own interest as well of the particular coding application described here.