Abstract A decisive paradigmatic change in the poetry of Lórinc Szabó in 1927–1928 seems to be synchronous with a comparable alteration in world literature: a shift from classical modernity to hermetism, abstract objectivism, consciousness lyric and a new subjectivism, trends which anticipated present day styles and have survived in neoavant-gardist and poststructuralist poetics. By this move his poetic practice transcended the phase represented by Stefan George, Rainer Maria Rilke, or Mihály Babits and paralleled poetic events then unseen or unforeseen by Lórinc Szabó. These included transmutations in the work of contemporary poets, Gottfried Benn, T. S. Eliot, Ezra Pound or Attila József. The novelty was not thematic but modal: a new discourse, a change from the homogeneous to the dialogical conception of the poem. In Lórinc Szabó's vision of personality the voice of the actorincludes the voice of the rebellious individualof traditional poetry (with a sociological view, a pragmatical-pedagogical motivation and a psychological quest for truth) counterpoised by the voice of the spectatorexhibiting the stable laws of the universe (passing a logical judgment). It was a radical novelty in his poetry that the distinction and distance of the ego and the world ceased to be a precondition of aesthetic formation and were replaced by the polyphonic utterance of a You and the World, which living in, and at the same time distanced from, the ego enter into a dialogue in their poetic quiddity. The idea of “one justice” informing world history gave way to a demand for the “one's justice.” Lórinc Szabó's sense of contradiction between the ego and history was reinforced by his study of Der Einzige und sein Eigentum by Max Stirner. In the light of this work he reconsidered the ideas of religion, fatherland, freedom, love, justice, and liberalism and came to confront all of the bonds of the individual personality and collective action. The poetic adaptation of Stirner's ideas presents a peculiar case of intertextuality: it encourages the poem's train of thought, tunes its mode of discourse, integrates textually in the course and rhetoric of creation, and occasionally informs the poems in their entirety (as a rule those of the highest poetic rank).