Abstract An integrated study based on fluid inclusion, δ18O composition and structural analyses was carried out on a Pliocene fossil hydrothermal system, located to the South of the present active Larderello geothermal field, in the Boccheggiano-Montieri area. The study area is typified by mineralized cataclastic levels related to Late Oligocene–Early Miocene thrust surfaces, and to the following two generations of normal faults of Miocene and Pliocene ages, respectively. Within the damage zone of the Pliocene Boccheggiano fault, the mineralization is mainly made up of quartz and pyrite. Quartz + Pb–Zn sulfides, or quartz + Pb–Zn sulfides + fluorite + carbonates assemblages occur instead in the older cataclastic levels. Two generations of liquid-rich fluid inclusions were recognized in quartz and fluorite: the first one, with homogenization temperatures ranging between 172 and 331°C and salinity between 0.0 and 8.8 wt.% NaClequiv., records the early stage of hydrothermal activity. The second generation of fluid inclusions documents a later stage, with homogenization temperature from 124 to 288°C and salinity from 0.2 to 1.9 wt.% NaClequiv.. Fluid inclusions analyses also indicate that mixing of fluid with distinct salinities and/or temperatures was a widespread process during the early stage, and that fluid temperatures decreased moving from the Boccheggiano fault toward the more distal and older cataclastic levels. The δ18O values of water in equilibrium with hydrothermal quartz, which range from −5.7 to −0.1‰, are related to the circulation of meteoric water mixed with saline water that leached the evaporite level and enriched in δ18O through water–rock interaction, and/or with magmatically derived fluids. Results indicate that the damage zone of the Pliocene Boccheggiano fault represented the main channel for the flow of meteoric water, which was heated at depth, then mixed with high salinity fluids, and finally ascend to infiltrate along the older cataclastic levels. Our results, based on fluid inclusions, oxygen isotopic compositions and structural analyses indicate that a single fluid flow path run through the damage zone of the Boccheggiano fault and the older cataclasites, which were thus hydraulically connected.