Abstract For the investigation of the tectonical situation of the Harz mountains various geophysical surveys were carried out during recent years. These included reflection seismic and refraction seismic lines crossing the Harz in NNE-SSW direction east of Clausthal-Zellerfeld. To complement this data magnetotelluric recordings were acquired in the same area, and a detailed gravity survey covered mainly the northern Harz margin. The investigations were directed primarily to test any evidence for overthrusting along the Harz margin with the possibility of less-consolidated sediments bearing hydrocarbon potential below the more-consolidated Harz sediments of mainly Lower Carboniferous or older age. The reflection seismic lines show mainly discontinuous reflections in several bands, but no single predominant reflection, similar e.g. to that of the Aachen — Faille du Midi overthrust in the western Rhenish Massif has been observed. As a main result of the refraction line the existence of a refracting horizon at a depth of less than 1 km in the NE (between Altenau and Bad Harzburg) has been shown dipping about 3 to 4 degrees to the SW to a depth of about 2500 m (near Herzberg) and continuing further to the south. The refraction velocity of 6250 m/s together with its geological setting favour an interpretation which associates this horizon with the top of the granitic intrusion of the Brocken pluton. It appears to underly the Harz and its southern foreland in great areal extent. No evidence for significant seismic inversion layers has been observed. The results of the magnetotelluric investigations are best explained by unconsolidated and electrically conductive sediments of the northern Harz foreland reaching south below the Harz paleozoic only about 2 km from the northern Harz margin. This agrees with the gravity field of the northern Harz margin which shows that the main increase of the Bouguer anomaly is within a zone of a few kilometers south of the boundary between mesozoic foreland sediments and the Harz paleozoic at the surface. Moreover, many tectonic details of the foreland and the internal tectonic units of the Harz show up on the map of the Bouguer anomaly.