Abstract IntroductionAcromegaly is a disorder with increased morbidity which can involve many organs and the eye can be one of them which was investigated in few reports. Herein, we aimed to evaluate CCT, IOP and retinal thickness (RT), and their relationships with serum GH and IGF-1 levels and disease duration, in acromegaly patients. We compared the ocular parameters with those of a control group. This study included the largest number of patients of any comparable investigation to date. Material and MethodWe enrolled 30 acromegaly patients (15 male, 15 female and age: 48.4 ± 12.8 years) and 21 age and gender matched controls. All participants underwent complete hormonal and ophtalmological evaluation including central corneal thickness (CCT), retinal thickness (RT) and intraocular pressure (IOP) values. ResultsThere were no significant differences in median right and left CCTs and mean CCT (p = 0.646, p = 0.667 and p = 0.384, respectively). Nor were there statistically significant differences in median right and left RT, or mean central RT, between the acromegaly and control groups (p = 0.977, p = 0.738 and p = 0.811, respectively). However median right, left and mean IOPs were found to be significantly higher in the acromegaly group, despite there being no difference in the CCT values (p = 0.011, p = 0.028 and p = 0.047, respectively). When we analyzed two subgroups of acromegaly patients (active/inactive), we found that the median right, left and mean CCTs and RTs, were not significantly different between the groups. Although there was a significant difference in IOP between the acromegaly and control groups, the two subgroups of acromegaly patients had similar IOPs (p = 0.400, p = 0.621 and p = 0.451 for right, left and mean IOPs, respectively). IOP was not found to be correlated with serum IGF-I, GH or disease duration in acromegaly patients. ConclusionOur study results suggest that acromegaly is associated with increased ocular pressures irrespective of disease activity. Therefore detailed ocular evaluation should be a routine component of the follow up visits of acromegaly patients.