Abstract Satellite-based measurements of aerosols are one of the most effective ways to understand the role of aerosols in climate in terms of spatial and temporal variability. In the present study, we attempted to analyse spatial and temporal variations of satellite derived aerosol optical depth (AOD) over Indian region using moderate resolution imaging spectrometer over a period of 2001–2011. Due to its vast spatial extent, Indian region and adjacent oceanic regions are divided into different zones for analysis. The land mass is sub divided into five different zones such as Indo Gangetic Plain (IGP), Indian mainland, North Eastern India (NE), South India-1 (SI-1), South India-2 (SI-2). Oceanic areas are divided into Arabian Sea and Bay of Bengal. Arabian Sea is further divided as three zones viz. Northern AS (NAS), Central AS (CAS) and Eastern AS (EAS) zones. Bay of Bengal is divided as North BoB (NBoB), West BoB (WBoB), Central BoB (CBoB), and East BoB (EBoB). The study revealed that among all the land regions, IGP showed the highest peak AOD value (0.52 ± 0.17) while SI-2 showed the lower values of AOD in all the months compared to all India average. The maximum AOD is observed during premonsoon season for all regions. During the winter, average AOD levels were substantially lower than the summer averages. Peak of aerosol loading (0.35 ± 0.159) is observed in March over NE region, whereas in all other regions, peak is observed during May. Frequency distribution of long term AOD (<0.2, 0.3–0.5, >0.5) shows a shift of frequency distribution of AOD from <0.3 to 0.3–0.5 during the study period in all regions except IGP. In IGP shift of frequency of AOD values occurs from 0.3–0.5 to >0.5. Oceanic areas also shows seasonal variation of AOD. Over Arabian Sea, high AOD values with greater variations were observed in summer monsoon season while in Bay of Bengal it is observed during winter monsoon. This is due to the high wind speed prevailing in Arabian Sea during monsoon season which results in production of more sea salt aerosol. Highest AOD values are observed over NAS during monsoon season and over NBOB during winter season. Lowest AOD values with its lower variations observed in both the central region of Arabian Sea and Bay of Bengal.
