Abstract New representatives of Gryllones (Insecta) of the orders Eoblattida, Reculida (Blattidea), and Cnemidolestida (Perlidea) from Ufimian–Urzhumian deposits of Russia are described. The following taxa are described in the order Eoblattida: Novokshonovus boreus sp. nov. from Vorkuta (Atactophlebiidae; Ufimian Stage of Perm Region); Idelina mala sp. nov. from Kityak (Permotermopsidae; Upper Kazanian Substage of Kirov Region); Megakhosarella paula sp. nov. from Soyana (Megakhosaridae; Lower Kazanian Substage of Arkhangelsk Region); Permopectina sibirica, sp. nov. from Tesh (Permopectinidae; Kazanian Stage of Kemerovo Region). Idelina kamensis Storozhenko, 1992 from Tikhie Gory (Lower Kazanian Substage of Tatarstan) is redescribed. The following taxa are assigned to Reculida: Arkhangeloptera sokica gen. et sp. nov. from the Lower Kazanian of Soyana in Arkhangelsk Region; Chauliodites incanus sp. nov. from the Urzhumian of Kargala in the Orenburg Region (Chaulioditidae); Permoshurabia komi sp. nov. from the Ufimian of Vorkuta in Perm Region; Geinitzia ima sp. nov.; Shurabia inferior sp. nov.; Stegopterum primus sp. nov. from the Kazanian of Soyana in Arkhangelsk Region; Permovalia abortiva gen. et sp. nov. from Kityak (Geinitziidae); Uraloprisca torta sp. nov. from Soyana; Artinska novella sp. nov. from Kityak (Lemmatophoridae); Sylvaella martynovi sp. nov. (Liomopteridae); Sylvaphlebia gunderseni sp. nov.; Sylviodes martynovae sp. nov. (Sylvaphlebiidae); Idelopterum samoedum gen. et sp. nov. (Pinideliidae) from Soyana. Liomopterella tota Aristov, 2005 from Vorkuta, Sibirella aberta Storozhenko, 1992 and Liomopterites pomorus Storozhenko, 1992 from Soyana are transferred to the genus Paraskalicia of the family Skaliciidae. The genus Rigidilioma from the Urzhumian Chepanikha locality in Udmurtia is transferred from the family Liomopteridae to Skaliciidae. The family Protembiidae (=Sojanoraphidiidae, syn. nov., =Tshekardominidae, syn. nov.), assigned to the order Cnemidolestida, is revised. The following new Kazanian protemibiids are described: Tshekardomina novokshonovi sp. nov.; Soyanocadaver crypticus gen. et sp. nov. from Soyana (Arkhangelsk Region of Russia) and Kirovopteron luteus gen. et sp. nov. from Kityak (Kirov Region of Russia). Ventopterum rapidum Kukalová, 1964 from Obora (Sakmarian Stage of Czech Republic) is redescribed and transferred from the family Havlatiidae to Protembiidae.