Abstract Until two decades or so ago the petrography of Iceland seemed to present a rather simple picture. About 99 per cent of the rocks were regarded as basaltic, 1 per cent as rhyolitic and rocks of intermediate composition as nearly non-existent. Recent research has changed this picture. Central volcanoes producing acid and intermediate lava and tephra have played a considerable role both in the Tertiary and Quaternary. Contrary to the lava massproducing basalt volcanoes, fed by a deep-seated and rather uniform basalt magma source, the differentiated central volcanoes are normally fed by separated magma chambers at smaller depth, where differentiation takes place between the eruptions, resulting in intermediate and acid products which bridge the “immiscibility gap” between the basalts and the rhyolites. Eight to ten per cent of the postglacial lavas and tephras and about 25 per cent of the historical ones are acid or intermediate. Opinions still differ as to whether the existence of these rocks can be explained solely as the result of gravitational differentiation of parent basalt magma or has to be explained partly by a remelting of a continental layer beneath the plateau-basalts. There are, however, some rather strong geological evidences in favour of the existence of such a layer and they seem at the moment not to be contradicted by geophysical research. The Surtsey eruption has demonstrated the close relation between the craterrows, shieldvolcanoes and tablemountains and convincingly shown how greatly external circumstances may influence volcanic activity and the shape of a volcano. The eruption focused interest on the neovolcanic zone of Iceland as a supra marine part of the Mid-Atlantic rift-ridge zone, where volcanic activity has taken place under similar conditions as along its submarine parts, viz. under water (glacial meltwater) when the Pleistocene ice-sheets blanketed the volcanic activity. Similar morphological types of volcanoes can therefore be expected in both cases, viz. steepsided mounds and long steepsided ridges.