Abstract Joan Chodorow is a dance/movement therapist and Jungian analyst practicing in Fairfax, California, a small, peaceful town across the Golden Gate Bridge from San Francisco. She is a graduate of the C.G. Jung Institute of Los Angeles and a member of the Jung Institute of San Francisco. She has been actively involved in dance/movement therapy for the past 24 years. She studied with Trudi Schoop and Mary Whitehouse in the early 1960s, then received a MA degree in psychology and dance therapy from Goddard College. She was one of the first dance therapists in California and one of the first to be licensed as a marriage, family, and child counselor. In 1972 she coordinated the first California regional ADTA Conference, was elected vice-president of ADTA in 1972, and served as president from 1974 to 1976. She can be seen in the ADTA film “Dance Therapy: the Power of Movement.” Joan has made a unique contribution in dance/movement therapy by putting the worldless into words. Since 1971 she has written numerous articles and publications on the philosophy and practice of dance therapy. Two of her early writings—“What Is Dance Therapy, Really?” and “Philosophy and Methods of Individual Work in Dance Therapy”—were among the first efforts to build a theory of movement therapy, particularly individual work. When they appeared, these articles were among few written teaching materials available. From that beginning, she has continued to share in written form the record of her evolving thought, as represented by her recent articles, “Dance and Body Experience in Analysis” (inJungian Analysis, M. Stein [Ed.]; La Salle: Open Court, 1982), “To Move and Be Moved,” (inQuadrant 17/2:39–48, 1984), and “The Body as Symbol: Dance/Movement in Analysis” (inThe Body in Analysis, N. Schwartz-Sulant and M. Stein [Eds.]; Wilmette, IL: Chiron, 1986). Today, in addition to her private practice, she continues to write, teach, and supervise students and therapists. Each year she teaches an intensive summer course in Zurich. Joan's enthusiasm, dedication, and love of her work are clearly evident as she speaks. As she talks, one senses a subtle, not-quite-expressed movement; it seems she could as well dance as speak what she has to say. It is a movement that provides an open space for a person with her to be and to move with her—in that person's own way. Through the years of involvement Joan retains a freshness, liveliness, and curiosity about movement of the human body and about the moving body's relationship to the psyche. There is always newness to be discovered, to be met with a sense of wonder and joy. Joan welcomes me to her home with a warm smile and twinkling blue eyes. We meet for the interview in her studio at one end of her home, where she sees clients. On a wall near us, at one end of an otherwise open expanse of bare hardwood floor, are shelves filled to overflowing with sand tray figures, ready to enter the waiting sand tray. Outside, on a wood-railed balcony, are art supplies for use when talk, sandplay, or movement wants to turn into another form of expression. In this atmosphere of warmth, welcome, and choice, Joan and I seat ourselves on soft comfortable chairs and begin to talk.