Abstract In his book,Creativity: The Magic Synthesis, Arieti comments on the incidence of creative activity in cluster-like formations through history. He suggests that this is a result of the coincidence of favourable environmental factors with the presence of creative individuals. It is possible that the simultaneous development of movement observation in the USA and in the UK in the sixties and early seventies constituted, on a small scale, such a phenomena. In the USA Martha Davis, Albert Scheflen, Judith Kestenberg, Alan Lomax, Forrestine Paulay, Irmgard Bartenieff, among others, and in the UK Rudolf Laban, Lisa Ullman, Warren Lamb, Walli Meier, Pamela Ramsden, Vi Bruce, Mary Wilkinson, Veronica Sherborne, Valerie Preston-Dunlop and of course Marion North, to name a few, were engaged in the study of observation of dance and movement. The development of this field was further encouraged by Irmgard Bartenieff's travels to the UK in the 1950's for further study with Laban, and Marion's trips to New York City to teach. In the early 1970s, invited by Bonnie Bird, then working at the Bureau, Marion presented a number of workshops at the Dance Notation Bureau where Irmgard Bartenieff was teaching. These workshops were originally offered only to Irmgard's students, but were eventually opened to the public. There was a great interest and many of the participants had an advanced level of training and experience. “These people were doing outstanding work in the States, and there were many creative discussions on the different interpretations and clarifications of Laban's work”. Marion participated directly in the early development of dance movement therapy in the USA through her teaching and research. Dr. North's contribution to dance movement therapy has been significant in her roles as a dance educator and administrator as well as in her work as a researcher in movement observation. In 1985, Marion served as a panel member inLooking Ahead, Planning Together, the Creative Arts in Therapy as an Integral Part of Treatment for the 90's, a symposium sponsored by Hahnemann University in Philadelphia. At this time she met Dianne Dulicai, then the Course Coordinator for the Hahnemann Dance Movement Therapy program. Marion was impressed with Dianne, and they began planning the establishment of the first MA course in Dance Movement Therapy to be offered in the UK at the Laban Centre. By bringing Master's level training in dance movement therapy to the UK, Marion has made a significant contribution to the continuing progress of the profession. Students who have trained at the Centre return to their homelands to practice their skills. Laban Centre graduates are currently practising in the UK, the Orient, Europe, Central America, South America, Africa, Australia and the USA. This paper is offered in commemoration of Dr. North's 20 year contribution to the profession of Dance Movement Therapy in the UK, the United States, and throughout the world.