Abstract E-commerce is expanding at a tremendous rate, and the related internet pages, referred to as an electronic servicescapes (e-servicescapes) now have a significant presence in the business world. Nevertheless, understanding of e-servicescape attributes remains unclear, due to the limited empirical evidence that has been obtained and examined. Therefore, this study aims to describe the nature of e-servicescapes and investigate the relationships among website trustworthiness, website attitude, brand attitude, e-WOM intention, and purchase intention. Furthermore, this study also aims to identify the role of two contextual factors, namely online purchasing experience and gender differences, and their effects on the relationships among the e-servicescape dimensions, website trustworthiness and attitude. A total of 290 responses were collected from Taiwanese consumers using online-based questionnaires. SPSS and partial least square were used to analyze the collected data. The findings show that e-servicescape dimensions (aesthetic appeal, customization, usability, and financial security) have significant impacts on consumer attitudes and trust toward a website. In particular, women are more likely to experience more positive effects of e-servicescape on internal responses, such as website trustworthiness and attitude. In addition, purchase intention and e-WOM intention can be influenced through internal responses. Based on the results of this study, it is recommended that website designers aim to improve the usability, customization, and financial security dimensions of their sites, and especially the aesthetic appeal, so the effectiveness of their designs can be optimized. It is also necessary for e-retailers to raise the top-of-the-mind awareness for their brands, as this can enhance trust in the website. In addition, marketers may add the ‘social network’ factor to offer a platform on which customers can connect with friends and share their experiences with the website and brand, as this may further enhance purchase intention.
