Abstract In this paper, we implement three scales of fracture integrated prediction study by classifying it to macro- (> 1/4位), meso- (> 1/100位 and < 1/4位) and micro- (< 1/100位) scales. Based on the multi-scales rock physics modelling technique, the seismic azimuthal anisotropy characteristic is analyzed for distinguishing the fractures of meso-scale. Furthermore, by integrating geological core fracture description, image well-logging fracture interpretation, seismic attributes macro-scale fracture prediction and core slice micro-scale fracture characterization, an comprehensive multi-scale fracture prediction methodology and technique workflow are proposed by using geology, well-logging and seismic multi-attributes. Firstly, utilizing the geology core slice observation (Fractures description) and image well-logging data interpretation results, the main governing factors of fracture development are obtained, and then the control factors of the development of regional macro-scale fractures are carried out via modelling of the tectonic stress field. For the meso-scale fracture description, the poststack geometric attributes are used to describe the macro-scale fracture as well, the prestack attenuation seismic attribute is used to predict the meso-scale fracture. Finally, by combining lithological statistic inversion with superposed results of faults, the relationship of the meso-scale fractures, lithology and faults can be reasonably interpreted and the cause of meso-scale fractures can be verified. The micro-scale fracture description is mainly implemented by using the electron microscope scanning of cores. Therefore, the development of fractures in reservoirs is assessed by valuating three classes of fracture prediction results. An integrated fracture prediction application to a real field in Sichuan basin, where limestone reservoir fractures developed, is implemented. The application results in the study area indicates that the proposed multi-scales integrated fracture prediction method and the technique procedureare able to deal with the strong heterogeneity and multi-scales problems in fracture prediction. Moreover, the multi-scale fracture prediction technique integrated with geology, well-logging and seismic multi-information can help improve the reservoir characterization and sweet-spots prediction for the fractured hydrocarbon reservoirs.
