Abstract This paper reports the results of geological, geochronological, and isotope geochemical investigations of two premetamorphic granite massifs of the Goloustnaya block of the Baikal salient of the basement of the Siberian craton and granite gneisses from the migmatite–gneiss sequence of this block. The U–Pb zircon age of the granites of the Khomut massif is 2153 ± 11 Ma. The age of the Elovka massif was previously determined by us as 2018 ± 28 Ma. The Khomut and Elovka granites underwent structural and metamorphic transformations accompanied by migmatization. An age of 1.98–1.97 Ga was obtained for the structural and metamorphic processes in the Goloustnaya block from the analysis of margins of zircon grains from the Khomut granites and zircon from the granite gneisses. The biotite granites of the Khomut massif show transitional I–S-type geochemical characteristics, which allowed us to suggest that they were derived by melting of a crustal source of intermediate–acid composition. The Khomut granites show positive εNd(T) values from +2.0 to +2.2 and a Nd model age of 2.4 Ga, which may indicate their formation owing to the reworking of the Paleoproterozoic juvenile continental crust. The combined isotope geochemical data are consistent with collision of island arcs as a possible environment for the formation of the Khomut granites. The formation of these granites was not related to the development of the structure of the Siberian craton, similar to a few other anorogenic magmatic complexes of the margin of the Chara–Olekma terrane of the Aldan shield with ages of ~2.2–2.1 Ga, including the granites of the Katugin complex. The biotite–amphibole granites of the Elovka massif with an age of ~2.02 Ga are geochemically similar to I-type granites. The geochemical characteristics of these granites, including elevated Sr and Ba and low Nb and Ta contents, were inherited from a subduction-related source. Negative εNd(T) values from–0.9 to–1.8 and rather high contents of K2O and Th allow us to suppose a metamagmatic crustal source for the granites of the Elovka massif. The combined isotope geochemical characteristics of the Elovka granites suggest that a mature island arc or an active continental margin is the most probable environment of their formation. The estimates of the age of structural and metamorphic processes affecting the Goloustnaya block (1.98–1.97 Ga) coinciding with the time of similar transformations in the central part of the Aldan shield and eastern Anabar shield (1.99–1.96 Ga) indicate wide occurrence of collisional events of similar age in the Siberian craton and allow us to consider this age interval as an early large-scale stage of the formaiton of the structure of the Siberian craton.
