Abstract BackgroundPlants develop sustainable defence responses to pathogen attacks through resistance (R) genes contributing to effector-triggered immunity (ETI). TIR-NB-LRR genes (TNL genes) constitute a major family of ETI R genes in dicots. The putative functions or roles of the TIR, NB and LRR domains of the proteins they encode (TNLs) are well documented, but TNLs also have a poorly characterised C-terminal region, the function of which is unknown in most cases. We characterised this prevalent stress-response protein family in a perennial plant, using the genome of peach (Prunus persica), the model Prunus species. The first TNL gene from this genus to be cloned, the Ma gene, confers complete-spectrum resistance to root-knot nematodes (RKNs) and encodes a protein with a huge C-terminal region with five duplicated post-LRR (PL) domains. This gene was the cornerstone of this study. ResultsWe investigated the role of this C-terminal region, by first describing the frequency, distribution and structural characteristics of i) TNL genes and ii) their PL domains in the peach genome, using the v1.0 Sanger sequence together with the v2.0 sequence, which has better genome annotation due to the incorporation of transcriptomic data. We detected 195 predicted TNL genes from the eight peach chromosomes: 85 % of these genes mapped to chromosomes 1, 2, 7 and 8. We reconstructed the putative structure of the predicted exons of all the TNL genes identified, and it was possible to retrieve the PL domains among two thirds of the TNL genes. We used our predicted TNL gene sequences to develop an annotation file for use with the Gbrowse tool in the v2.0 genome. The use of these annotation data made it possible to detect transcribed PL sequences in two Prunus species. We then used consensus sequences defined on the basis of 124 PL domains to design specific motifs, and we found that the use of these motifs significantly increased the numbers of PL domains and correlative TNL genes detected in diverse dicot genomes. Based on PL signatures, we showed that TNL genes with multiple PL domains were rare in peach and the other plants screened. The five-PL domain pattern is probably unique to Ma and its orthologues within Prunus and closely related genera from the Rosaceae and was probably inherited from the common ancestor of these plants in the subfamily Spiraeoideae. ConclusionsThe first physical TNL gene map for Prunus species can be used for the further investigation of R genes in this genus. The PL signature motifs are a complementary tool for the detection of TNL R genes in dicots. The low degree of similarity between PL domains and the neighbouring LRR exons and the specificity of PL signature motifs suggest that PL and LRR domains have different origins, with PL domains being specific to TNL genes, and possibly essential to the functioning of these genes in some cases. Investigations of the role of the oversized Ma PL region, in ligand binding or intramolecular interactions for example, may help to enrich our understanding of NB-LRR-mediated plant immunity to RKNs.
