Abstract BackgroundXylan is the most abundant un-cellulosic polysaccharides of plant cell walls. Much progress in xylan biosynthesis has been gained in the model plant species Arabidopsis. Two homologous pairs Irregular Xylem 9 (IRX9)/9L and IRX14/14L from glycosyltransferase (GT) family 43 have been proved to play crucial roles in xylan backbone biosynthesis. However, xylan biosynthesis in grass such as Miscanthus remains poorly understood. ResultsWe characterized seven GT43 members in M. lutarioriparius, a promising bioenergy crop. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis revealed that the expression of MlGT43 genes was ubiquitously detected in the tissues examined. In-situ hybridization demonstrated that MlGT43A-B and MlGT43F-G were specifically expressed in sclerenchyma, while MlGT43C-E were expressed in both sclerenchyma and parenchyma. All seven MlGT43 proteins were localized to Golgi apparatus. Overexpression of MlGT43A-E but not MlGT43F and MlGT43G in Arabidopsis irx9 fully or partially rescued the mutant defects, including morphological changes, collapsed xylem and increased xylan contents, whereas overexpression of MlGT43F and MlGT43G but not MlGT43A-E complemented the defects of irx14, indicating that MlGT43A-E are functional orthologues of IRX9, while MlGT43F and MlGT43G are functional orthologues of IRX14. However, overexpression of all seven MlGT43 genes could not rescue the mucilage defects of irx14 seeds. Furthermore, transient transactivation analyses of MlGT43A-E reporters demonstrated that MlGT43A and MlGT43B but not MlGT43C-E were differentially activated by MlSND1, MlMYB46 or MlVND7. ConclusionThe results demonstrated that all seven MlGT43s are functionally conserved in xylan biosynthesis during secondary cell wall formation but diversify in seed coat mucilage xylan biosynthesis. The results obtained provide deeper insight into xylan biosynthesis in grass, which lay the foundation for genetic modification of grass cell wall components and structure to better suit for next-generation biofuel production.
