Summary 1.Surgical sections or smaller chemical lesions made in the optic tract of one eye of the crayfish,Procambarus clarkii, lead to loss of the ERG amplitude rhythm in the operated eye while the intact eye continued to oscillate in constant darkness (Fig. 2). Apparent recovery of generally lower amplitude oscillations after surgery did, however, occur in 7 out of 17 preparations tested (Fig. 6).2.Only lesions which included the central part of the optic tract resulted in a loss of rhythmicity (Fig. 1). Ultrastructure of this region of the optic tract showed axons with dense core vesicles and blood vessels; however, presumptive neurosecretory axons were not confined to this region (Fig. 3, 4).3.Tests for circulatory patency of the lesioned optic system were made by injecting eyestalk hormone extracts. Such injections caused depression of the ERG amplitude of both the operated and unoperated eye indicating that exogenous (and presumable endogenous) hormone reached the retina. Hormone injections, however, failled to alter the phase of the rhythm (Fig. 5).4.Low level unilateral retinal illumination in an animal with intact optic tracts successfully entrained the ERG rhythm in both eyes (Fig. 7).5.In operated animals unilateral illumination of the neurally isolated retina failed to entrain the intact contralateral side as evidenced by the fact that the intact side free-ran throughout the 13 days of attempted entrainment (Fig. 8A).6.Transfer of the entraining light to the intact retina phase-shifted its rhythm, while the operated eye became phase-locked to and appeared to be driven by the intact side (Fig. 8B).7.A summary diagram is provided which details the known coupling components of this circadian system (Fig. 9). Both hormonal and neural coupling appear to synchronize retinal sensitivity in the two eyes. Although the hormonal contribution is substantial, preliminary evidence indicates that their titers are driven by the underlying clock rather than comprising an integral part of the oscillator itself (Fig. 5).