Summary PURPOSE: To report about the results of the ICAPE (Interactive Computer Aided Patient Education) Pilot Study. STUDY DESIGN: Evaluation of a new technology. METHODS: 144 participants, consisting of 20 patients about to undergo cataract surgery (Group 1), 18 ophthalmologists and ophthalmic registered nurses (Group 2), 18 medical interns (Group 3), and 88 lay-persons (group 4) were shown varying interactive computer animations from the 3D-Eye-Office™ (Eyemaginations™) software package which lasted between 4 minutes (Group 1) and 2 hours (Group 2). These videos explained the physiology and the anatomy of the human visual system, as well as the patho-physiology of myopia, hyperopia, cataracts, diabetic retinopathy, age related macular degeneration, retinal detachment, retinal tears, and glaucoma. They also explained in depth the ophthalmic surgical procedures relating to these diseases and the possible risks and complications. After the participants had viewed the videos, they were asked to fill out questionnaires relating to the quality and usefulness of the videos. RESULTS: 144 participants were asked to answer a total of 1254 questions about a total of 9 ophthalmic subjects taught to them using the 3D-Eye Office™ patient education system. The results of the questionnaires showed overwhelming approval of the quality of the videos from all participant groups. If the results from Groups 1 and 4 are added together and expressed as a percentage, the average approval rating for the videos from patients is 92.7%. If the results from Groups 2 and 3 are added together and expressed as a percentage, the average approval rating for the videos from medical professionals is 88.9%. CONCLUSION: The 3D-Eye Office™ system is a clear and concise method of educating patients about complex subjects in ophthalmology. However, the system should not be used as a replacement for the standard informed consent process, but rather as a precursor to it. This may help to streamline the informed consent process. The 3D-Eye Office™ system could also be very useful in the education of student nurses and non-ophthalmic medical professionals. These points need to be verified in a larger multi center study.