Abstract The lateral ocelli of Scolopendra cingulata and Scolopendra oraniensis were examined by electron microscopy. A pigmented ocellar field with four eyes arranged in a rhomboid configuration is present frontolaterally on both sides of the head. Each lateral ocellus is cup-shaped and consists of a deeply set biconvex corneal lens, which is formed by 230–2,240 cornea-secreting epithelial cells. A crystalline cone is not developed. Two kinds of photoreceptive cells are present in the retinula. 561–1,026 cylindrical retinula cells with circumapically developed microvilli form a large distal rhabdom. Arranged in 13–18 horizontal rings, the distal retinula cells display a multilayered appearance. Each cell layer forms an axial ring of maximally 75 rhabdomeres. In addition, 71–127 club-shaped proximal retinula cells make up uni- or bidirectional rhabdomeres, whose microvilli interdigitate. 150–250 sheath cells are located at the periphery of the eye. Radial sheath cell processes encompass the soma of all retinula cells. Outside the eye cup there are several thin layers of external pigment cells, which not only ensheath the ocelli but also underlie the entire ocellar field, causing its darkly pigmented. The cornea-secreting epithelial cells, sheath cells and external pigment cells form a part of the basal matrix extending around the entire eye cup. Scolopendromorph lateral ocelli differ remarkably with respect to the eyes of other chilopods. The dual type retinula in scolopendromorph eyes supports the hypothesis of its homology with scutigeromorph ommatidia. Other features (e.g. cup-shaped profile of the eye, horizontally multilayered distal retinula cells, interdigitating proximal rhabdomeres, lack of a crystalline cone, presence of external pigment and sheath cells enveloping the entire retinula) do not have any equivalents in scutigeromorph ommatidia and would, therefore, not directly support homology. In fact, most of them (except the external pigment cells) might be interpreted as autapomorphies defining the Pleurostigmophora. Certain structures (e.g. sheath cells, interdigitating proximal rhabdomeres, discontinuous layer of cornea-secreting epithelial cells) are similar to those found in some lithobiid ocelli (e.g. Lithobius). The external pigment cells in Scolopendra species, however, must presently be regarded as an autapomorphy of the Scolopendromorpha.