Abstract The production of shoots from roots (adventitious bud and shoot formation, root sprouting) first attracted attention in the 19th century as a morphological rarity. At that time, the first checklists of plants capable of root sprouting were compiled. Since then, experiments have proven that the ability to produce buds on roots serves the purpose of bud bank formation or represents a mode of clonal growth. The former enables resprouting after injury whereas the latter facilitates foraging for nutrients and vegetative multiplication. However, only a small proportion of root-sprouters have been studied so far, and for most of them we lack detailed data on the anatomy, morphology, ecology and physiology of adventitious shoot formation. These knowledge gaps hinder further understanding of their ecology and evolution. To support researchers interested in adventitious bud and shoot formation in any field of plant science, we compiled a list of plants considered capable of root sprouting based on the literature and the CLO-PLA database for the flora of the Czech Republic. Here we provide basic comparisons concerning the distribution of root sprouting ability among life history types, plants differing in rarity and invasive status, and taxonomic groups. Altogether 342 plant species are reported to be root-sprouters, i.e. 10% of the Czech flora. Root-sprouters are most commonly found among woody plants, less so among non-clonal perennial herbs, biennials and clonal herbs, and least commonly among annuals. Root-sprouters are more common among alien plants (especially woody ones) than among red-listed plants. Root sprouting usually plays a supplementary (facultative) or regenerative role in the plant life cycle. Root-sprouters occur in 64 families, mostly of dicots. The greatest number of root-sprouters belong to the Asteraceae and Rosaceae families (41). We have only rudimentary information on 145 species out of the 342 (42%) species that are regarded as root-sprouters.