Abstract Mimosa is an important genus of legumes in arid and semi-arid ecosystems of the world, but scarce information is available about its interaction with microbial symbionts. In Mexico, there are no reports on the responsive of endemic Mimosa species to arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungal colonization. In this study, the AM association with seedlings of six endemic Mimosa species, M. adenantheroides, M. calcicola, M. lacerata, M. luisana, M. polyantha and M. texana var. filipes, is reported. Field conditions were simulated in the greenhouse. Seeds were collected from plants and soil from the localities where the species occur within the semi-arid Tehuacán–Cuicatlán Valley, Mexico. Four treatments were applied: (1) control, (2) benomyl, (3) phosphorus, and (4) benomyl plus phosphorus. Mycorrhizal seedlings of five species, M. adenantheroides, M. lacerata, M. luisana, M. polyantha and M. texana var. filipes, showed a higher shoot and total dry weight than non-mycorrhizal seedlings. The only species that did not show any difference between mycorrhizal and non-mycorrhizal seedling performance was M. calcicola. M. luisana, M. polyantha and M. texana var. filipes had a higher root/shoot ratio; in general, benomyl treatments promoted seedling biomass allocation to the root, while control, phosphorus and benomyl plus phosphorus treatments decrease root/shoot ratio. Shoot P content was significantly higher in mycorrhizal than in non-mycorrhizal plants, although no significant differences were found for M. adenantheroides in all treatments. Benomyl and benomyl plus phosphorus treatments reduced AM colonization in all the species under study. Benomyl significantly reduced the number of N2-fixing root nodules, while the phosphorus treatment generally stimulated nodulation. The species M. lacerata, M. luisana, M. polyantha and M. texana var. filipes had a high mycorrhizal dependency index indicating that plant growth was strongly increased by arbuscular mycorrhiza activity. Our results indicate that the response of all Mimosa species to mycorrhization was highly variable. To our knowledge, this is the first report about the effect of AM fungi and phosphorus on Mimosa species, which may be useful in biodiversity and soil conservation programs.