Abstract We compared different approaches for modelling height growth of individual beech seedlings in a controlled factorial experiment as well as in field data from naturally regenerated beech seedlings under the canopy of overstorey mature beech trees. Several competition indices, a model of overstorey fine root density, relative photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) values, and soil water values were used in these approaches. In the factorial experiment relative PAR and soil water content were measured and used for the prediction of seedlings height growth. In the field experiment this was done by using relative PAR and estimated fine root biomass as a surrogate for below ground resource availability. The latter approach was compared with a model where we used various competition indices representing the impact of overstorey trees on beech seedlings. Our results suggested that (1) models which combine resource based growth functions are suitable for the prediction of individual height growth of beech seedlings. Resource based models offer the opportunity to investigate on the independent multiplicative effect of irradiance and water supply and their interactions on tree seedlings. It was (2) shown that a combined model could be used not only to predict individual height growth of beech seedlings in a controlled experiment but also in the field. The model parameters of a pure light response function for the controlled factorial experiment are comparable to those obtained in the field study. The results showed (3) that the precision of predicting beech seedlings height growth is comparable between the model types tested within this study. Approximately half of the observed variation in seedlings relative height growth rate could be explained. However, the simple competition index approach provides no information on the environmental factors constraining tree seedlings growth; whereas the multiplicative combined models can be used to get a better understanding of growth dynamics in the field.