Summary The whole dung-inhabiting (adult) beetle community living in southern Finland was studied with reference to the seasonal (6 summer months), macrohabitat (open field, half-open pine forest and closed spruce forest) and successional (30 days) gradients. The material comprised 50 coprophagous and 129 carnivorous species, represented by 26,650 and 35,850 individuals, respectively. The most important characteristics of each species are given in an Appendix. In the coprophages the species-abundance relations fitted the lognormal distribution well, but in the carnivores the distribution was strikingly less even. A great number of other differences (see below) apparent between the two trophic groups were explained as the result of a difference in the degree of specialization, apart from the difference in their trophic position: coprophages are microhabitat (dung) and food specialists, while carnivores are microhabitat generalists (and therefore their “critical” niche space was not completely covered in this study). In the coprophages, two important species guilds were observed: the first occurred at the very geginning of the succession (mean position 2.5 days), and consisted mainly of true dung specialists; the second guild contained species with wider utilization along the successional dimension (mean position 6.5 days), and species of more generalist nature (saprophages). The utilization of carnivores along the successional gradient was more continuous, probably because of their more diversified food resources. The total niche width among the coprophages increased from early successional species to species occurring mainly later on, but was more constant in carnivores. The environmental dimensions proved to be totally independent of each other among the carnivores, while the coprophages showed a clear supplementary relationship along them. Among the carnivores, a spherical niche shape dominated, but among the coprophages elongated and disk-liked shapes were also well represented, especially in specialist species. In both groups, a significant positive correlation existed between niche width and dominance, but not between niche width and abundance. It is suggested that the patchy distribution and transient occurrence of suitable microhabitats contributes to the coexistence of many ecologically similar species.