Summary Leaf phenology describes the seasonal cycle of leaf functioning and is essential for understanding the interactions between the biosphere, the climate and the atmosphere. In this study, we characterized the spatial patterns in phenological variations in eight contrasting forest types in an Indian region using coarse resolution NOAA AVHRR satellite data. The onset, offset and growing season length for different forest types has been estimated using normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI). Further, the relationship between NDVI and climatic parameters has been assessed to determine which climatic variable (temperature or precipitation) best explain variation in NDVI. In addition, we also assessed how quickly and over what time periods does NDVI respond to different precipitation events. Our results suggested strong spatial variability in NDVI metrics for different forest types. Among the eight forest types, tropical dry deciduous forests showed lowest values for summed NDVI (SNDVI), averaged NDVI (ANDVI) and integrated NDVI (I-NDVI), while the tropical wet evergreen forests of Arunachal Pradesh had highest values. Within the different evergreen forest types, SNDVI, ANDVI and INDVI were highest for tropical wet evergreen forests, followed by tropical evergreen forests, tropical semi-evergreen forests and were least for tropical dry evergreen forests. Differences in the amplitude of NDVI were quite distinct for evergreen forests compared to deciduous ones and mixed deciduous forests. Although, all the evergreen forests studied had a similar growing season length of 270 days, the onset and offset dates were quite different. Response of vegetative greenness to climatic variability appeared to vary with vegetation characteristics and forest types. Linear correlations between mean monthly NDVI and temperature were found to yield negative relationships in contrast to precipitation, which showed a significant positive response to vegetation greenness. The correlations improved much for different forest types when the log of cumulative rainfall was correlated against mean monthly NDVI. Of the eight forest types, the NDVI for six forest types was positively correlated with the logarithm of cumulative rainfall that was summed for 3–4 months. Overall, this study identifies precipitation as a major control for vegetation greenness in tropical forests, more so than temperature.