Abstract Arabic language is one of six United Nations official languages. Arabic language processing, in particular speech synthesis, is a challenging task due to the inherent complexity of the language text and characters and because each letter may have up to seven different sounds. In this paper, we provide subjective and objective evaluation for six different speech synthesizer applications available on the Internet for Arabic language namely: Acapela, ISpeech, Arabi, Sakhr, Google, and Nuance. In the case of subjective evaluation the authors performed four intelligibility tests: Diagnostic Rhyme, Modified Rhyme, Phonetically Confusable Sentences. The fourth test is proposed by the authors, Automatic Diacritization Intelligibility (ADI) which is used to test the intelligibility of the speech engine in predicting the diacritization mark according to the word context in the statement. Another two tests were performed to evaluate other features of the speech engines are: first, Arabic Text with All Sounds (ATAS) test which is used to evaluate different features when the speech engine reads Arabic text that contains all sounds for different Arabic letters. Second, Best/Worst Pleasant Voice this test is proposed by the authors to determine the best and worst speech engine in terms of the voice pleasantness. The other type of evaluation conducted is objective evaluation we evaluate the output of the six systems objectively and compare the results with the subjective evaluations performed. Such comparison is achieved by computing some objective metrics from the signals of both the generated sound by the systems and a reference one (i.e., the same text is spoken by a human). Two types of measurements are used as the objective metrics; signal to noise variation (segmented SNR) and a linear predictive (LP-based) measure. The originality of the evaluation is that it is based on using an Arabic text (diacritized and non-diacritized) containing all sounds of Arabic letters. Another novelty is that we introduced two tests ADI and ATAS tests for Arabic speech synthesizers evaluation. The result from subject users are provided to measure clearness/naturalness, speed, sound quality, pronunciation, clearness, stress/intonation, pronunciation errors, intelligibility, and pleasantness. In addition, results from experts are presented to measure the articulation of each sound, number of not pronounced words, and the speed of reading. The obtained results reveal the need to have speech synthesizers for Arabic language that considers diacritization to enhance the performance of the system. It points also to the importance of having an accurate automatic diacritization system that generates a diacritized text to be synthesized. The results show the significance of having a human similar voice for the speech synthesizer. We proposed a set of recommendations for improving Arabic speech synthesizers.
