Abstract This paper presents the results of research regarding the possibilities of the revival of the traditional Bosnian single-family house. The architectural design, spatial organization, and connection with the natural environment make it a valuable example of residential architecture. The use of local natural materials such as wood, stone, and adobe brick, brings this typology back into the limelight. This study illustrates that due to the increasing need to save energy, the importance to use natural materials, and integration of sustainable design into architectural design processes, our contemporaries turn to past examples in order to reference benchmarks combined with cutting edge technology for buildings of the future. Because Bosnia has large wooded areas, and a policy goal is to use local resources, the research aim was to establish if modern prefabricated wooden houses can reproduce traditional Bosnian architecture while meeting the highest energy efficiency requirements. Many Bosnians fear that traditional Bosnian architecture will be lost due to new construction, therefore there is opposition against the harmonization of standards. The solutions for redesigning traditional Bosnian single-family homes to meet energy efficiency requirements were obtained using the “BuildOpt_VIE” dynamic thermal simulation software. It was used to find optimal solutions in building physics, along with several variations to be applied during construction of new buildings and reconstruction of existing buildings. This research sets a foundation for further developments in contemporary individual residences, optimized according to recent building physics standards. The purpose of this paper is inter alia to show that nothing stands in the way to harmonize technical guidelines and regulations in the field of energy-efficient buildings in Bosnia and Herzegovina (B&H), and the adaption of existing norms. Despite the EU requirements as mandated in the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive, the rich architecture of B&H has potential to fulfill the directive’s conditions. By selecting the best solutions from the rich architectural tradition of B&H and optimizing the architectural design and building physics, B&H takes a step towards EU integration. Here, we show the possibility to keep traditional architecture while achieving state of the art energy efficiency.