Abstract PurposeThis study aims to explore the experiences of patients enrolled in a cancer-related clinical drug treatment trial utilising a qualitative focus-group methodology. Specifically, this study aimed to explore the impact of social and family support, the challenges and advantages of taking part in a clinical trial and the experiences of patients at the conclusion of the trial. MethodsA qualitative study was conducted at a public hospital in Melbourne in 2008. A total of 14 participants were recruited. Three focus groups and two interviews were conducted with 13 patients who had completed a cancer-related clinical trial. Comments from a letter written by a trial participant were also analysed. Interviews were audio-recorded, transcribed and coded according to emerging themes. ResultsInformation obtained was grouped around four main themes; making sense of trial participation, challenges of treatment in the context of clinical trial participation, support during trial participation and coping with trial conclusion. Participants experienced a mixture of hope, uncertainty and apprehension as they considered whether to take part in a clinical trial. At different stages of the trial they made sense of their participation by thinking about the possible benefits of participation. Trial participation was also associated with a number of emotional and practical challenges. Generally, participants were very positive about the support they received from health professionals, family and friends. The end of the trial was associated with a mix of emotions, including relief, disappointment, hope of future help, uncertainty and abandonment. ConclusionsClinical trial participation is a positive experience for many patients with cancer, although there are a number of associated practical and emotional challenges. Trial participants may benefit from closer follow-up from clinical trial staff, especially the treating doctor, assessment of support needs and help in re-evaluating the meaning of their trial participation if their initial hopes and expectations are not met.