Abstract The ubiquitous cloud infrastructure different access methods are analyses to understand new message protocols that are used ubiquitous IoT mobile application environment that presented the cloud computing platform for mobile application. It supports a combined architecture of ubiquitous and cloud computing which provides a powerful framework for mobile application that requires high performance. The cloud infrastructure for ubiquitous computing environment mobile application (CI-UCEMA), which consist of three layers it cloud service layer (CSL), M2M service layer (MSL) and ubiquitous service layer (USL). The M2M consists of IoT services layer (MSL) will involve a decrease in complexity of both the improvement and controlling of IoT systems. This can be distinguished by improved interoperability and, carefully related, the improvement and use of normal. Security will also remain a grassroots regard as device management and provisioning are accomplished. The MSL is responsible for shielding the user from the underlying complexity and variability through self-tuning environment by mobility and adaptation which are points in CDPS and CIMS. The MSL components has human to object communication (HOC), human to human communication (HHC), object remote information device (OID) and micro M2M data access (M3DA). HOC has something concerned communications with PC, TV, PDA, Wearable PC, mobile phone and LTE black box. HHC supports services concerned with making same human to human communications environment in the everywhere. The UML (called uMain) is responsible for shielding the user from the underlying complexity and variability through self-tuning environment by mobility and adaptation which are points in cloud distributed parallel data processing service (CDPS) and cloud infrastructure management (CIMS). We have presented a system which gives a context-aware infrastructure that supports the gathering of context information from various simulations and the delivery of appropriate context information to mobile applications. Relevant simulations and experiments are given to evaluate the performance of the proposed system demand model. The CI-UCEMA is that have presented a ubiquitous computing environment on cloud computing platform for mobile application. This supports a combined architecture of ubiquitous and cloud computing this is a powerful framework for mobile applications along with high performance result.
