Abstract Catherine Pasternak and Marion Gibbons had a long and close working relationship with Marian Chace, the woman often considered the founder of dance/movement therapy. Together they provide an in-depth look at Chace's impact on the development of dance/movement therapy. Cathy is often credited with carrying on Marian Chace's legacy. Working longer with Marian Chace than any other dance therapist, Cathy's skills, ability to work with patients, and her personality earned her the chairmanship of the dance therapy section upon Marian Chace's retirement. Cathy received her B.A. in psychology from Ohio Wesleyan University and began her full-time dance therapy work at St. Elizabeth's Hospital in 1963 under Marian Chace. When Cathy left the hospital in 1968, she had served as chief of the dance therapy section for two years. A charter member of the American Dance Therapy Association, Cathy served as the Association's first secretary. Most recently, Cathy founded and has been directing three liturgical dance companies; she also conducts workshops in the use of the arts in church and choreographs high school and community theatre musicals. Marion Gibbons first became interested in music therapy during his service in World War II. He entered the Baldwin-Wallace Conservatory and graduated with a Bachelor's degree in music. In 1955, he began work in music at St. Elizabeth's Hospital with the Chaplain's branch on a part-time basis. The following year he was hired full time by the recreation branch of the hospital and served there until 1960 when he transferred to the dance therapy section. He left St. Elizabeth's in 1970. Currently, he is the director of music at the First Church of Munson in Massachusetts. Ann Lohn received her B.S. in psychology from Purdue University and a M.A. degree in dance education from George Washington University. She was interviewed and hired by Marian Chace in 1966. Since Marian's retirement coincided with Ann's employment, her supervision and training were conducted by Cathy Pasternak. Ann worked at St. Elizabeth'sospital full time from 1966 to 1979, serving as chief of the dance therapy section from 1969 to 1979. After leaving St. Elizabeth's Hospital, Ann joined the faculty of the dance/movement therapy graduate program at Goucher College. She has also worked at Gundry Hospital and Springfield Hospital. Ann was secretary of the American Dance Therapy Association from 1968 to 1970, treasurer from 1970 to 1972, and member of the registry committee from 1972 to 1977. Currently Ann and her husband own and operate a fishing resort in Ontario.