Conclusion The role of grammatical relations is a key issue in syntactic theory. A central claim of Relational Grammar is that there are multiple levels of syntactic structure, and at all of these levels syntactic constituents bear grammatical relations. This paper provides evidence for this claim. The condition on Object Raising crucially refers to the grammatical relations borne by the raisee at all syntactic levels. It cannot be stated simply in terms of GRs borne in initial and final syntactic levels. For example, the analysis of the interaction of Object Raising and causative constructions shows that the Object Raising condition must check all GRs borne by the raisee in both the union clause and its complement (section 4.1). The preceding analysis makes several more specific contributions to the framework of RG and to the study of French syntax. New evidence is provided in support of the Clause Union analysis of causative constructions (section 4.1), and of the Unaccusative Hypothesis (sections 3.5.2 and 4.1). The analysis also argues for less widely-accepted proposals in the RG framework:uadoption of Fauconnier's revision of the Final 1 Law (section 4.1);an analysis of object-controlled Equi in terms of cross-clausal multiattachment (section 4.2);counterevidence to the Passive analysis in two constructions involving a par-complement: faire par and croire par (section 4.3); the discussion of the first construction corroborates Fauconnier (1983) and Rosen (1983); the discussion of the second construction is, to the best of my knowledge, entirely new.an extension of the Clause Union analysis of causatives to also include SOR and predicate structures (section 4.3);an extension of Postal's proposal of 3 to 2 Advancement to include the avertir-class (section 3.7), and a proposal for Loc to 2 Advancement in French (section 3.6);multiattachment is not equivalent to coindexation: the latter alone fails to make the right predictions for French (section 4.2). I would also like to thank Gilles Fauconnier, Marie Helsmoortel, Annie Olié, and my colleagues of the UCSD Language Program for comparing and sharing their native intuitions, and Karen Andrews and Paul Smolensky for help with the computer.