<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2bd2f5f324b6cf38d6d2fcd4eedc5113> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary In animals with fur or feather coats, heat gain from solar radiation is a function of coat optical, structural, and insulative characteristics, as well as skin color and the optical properties of individual hairs or feathers. In this analysis, I explore the roles of these factors in determining solar heat gain in two desert rodents (the Harris antelope squirrel,Ammospermophilus harrisi, and the round-tailed ground squirrel,Spermophilus tereticaudus). Both species are characterized by black dorsal skin, though they contrast markedly in their general coat thickness and structure. Results demonstrate that changes in coat structure and hair optics can produce differences of up to 40% in solar heat gain between animals of similar color. This analysis also confirms that the model of Walsberg et al. (1978) accurately predicts radiative heat loads within about 5% in most cases. Simulations using this model indicate that dark skin coloration increases solar heat gain by ≤5%. However, dark skin significantly reduces ultraviolet transmission to levels about one-sixth of those of the lighter ventral skin." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f298f89634965ad3c2348210ae22930d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract BackgroundTrophic interactions and population structure can shape how climate change influences ecosystems by modifying herbivore responses to environmental conditions. Predation can influence herbivore behaviour and demography, but how changes in predation and population structure affect herbivore distribution across abiotic gradients remains little known. We assessed whether predators altered the response of different age and sex classes of a dominant ungulate herbivore to changing abiotic conditions. ResultsElk (Cervus elaphus) presence declined with increasing snowpack, particularly in late winter when their body condition had deteriorated. Females and juveniles exhibited strong but constant negative responses to snowpack throughout the winter, although their mean occurrence declined over time likely due to sex-biased movement to lower elevations. Mature male occurrence responded only very slightly to snowpack and in a temporally invariant manner. Neither temporal nor spatial variation in wolf (Canis lupus) occurrence affected elk occurrence or elk responses to snowpack. ConclusionsClimate change impacts on herbivore distribution in this system are driven by spatially and temporally dynamic interactions between winter conditions and population structure, but the influence of predation risk appears weak." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d02c309c49ddfa8280b00a179c35041b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The relationship between the food selection of four leaf beetle species (Phratora vitellinae, Plagiodera versicolora, Lochmaea capreae, Galerucella lineola) and the phenolic glycosides of willow (Salix spp.) leaves was tested in laboratory food choice experiments. Four willow species native to the study area (Eastern Finland) and four introduced, cultivated willows were tested. The willow species exhibited profound differences in their phenolic glycoside composition and total concentration. The food selection patterns of the leaf beetles followed closely the phenolic glycoside spectra of the willow species. Both the total amount and the composition of phenolic glycosides affected the feeding by the beetles. Phenolic glycosides apparently have both stimulatory and inhibitory influences on leaf beetle feeding depending on the degree of adaptation of a particular insect. Very rare glycosides or exceptional combination of several glycoside types seem to provide certain willow species with high level of resistance against most herbivorous insects. Analogously the average absolute amount of leaf beetle feeding was lower on the introduced willows than on the native species to which the local herbivores have a good opportunity to become adapted." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/c7a34e7016783b0e756752d92493c02b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Snakes are obligate predatory organisms that consume prey whole, and despite their precocious nature, snakes must develop effective feeding skills, especially when encountering large prey. I conducted two experiments that document the development of behavioral repertoires for naïve hatchling trinket snakes, Coleognathus helena. In the first experiment, I examined how experience with prey of different relative prey mass encountered at regular feeding intervals affects hatchling feeding response. I also examined whether hatchling feeding performance improved over time. Improvement was evaluated on the frequency of the most effective behavioral states such as complex prey restraint behaviors and anterior-first ingestion. In the second experiment I tested whether feeding experience with prey of a particular size influences the way hatchlings respond to a novel prey size. All hatchlings improved their predatory behavior when prey size and number of trials were controlled. Hatchlings feeding on larger prey, however, showed greater overall improvement in their feeding behavior and were quick to integrate complex prey restraint behaviors such as constriction into their feeding repertoire. Despite the fact that early experience with one prey size seemed to shape their restraint repertoire during their first four feeding events, hatchlings remained flexible and responded to prey of a novel size with size-specific prey restraint behaviors." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d5014f09fcb0ded85dad77938d2ff607> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Perfluorinated organic compounds (PFCs) such as PFOS, PFOA, PFBS, PFH×S, PFOSA and PFDoA were determined in river water, river sediment, liver of market fish and liver of wildlife samples from Japan. Concentrations of PFOA and PFOS in water samples were 7.9–110 and <5.2–10 ng/L. Only PFOA were detected in sediment from Kyoto river at 1.3–3.9 ng/g dry wt. Among fish, only jack mackerel showed PFOA and PFOS at 10 and 1.6 ng/g wet wt. Wildlife liver contained PFOSA, PFOS, PFDoA, PFOA and PFH×S in the range of 0.31–362, 0.15–238, <0.03–28, >0.07–7.3 and <0.03–1.5, respectively, on ng/g wet wt. Cormorants showed maximum accumulation followed by eagle, raccoon dog and large-billed crow." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d464c7aeea34eb616e95ba9fe1b39fc9> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Sources of variation in yields (as a fraction of leaf weight) of 1,8-cineole, α-pinene, β-pinene and limonene in the leaf oils of young Petford Eucalyptus camaldulensis trees were studied. The oil yields of leaves up to 5 months of age were significantly affected by physiological changes associated with leaf maturation. The extent of these changes depends on genotype and on external influences such as soil moisture conditions. Prolonged drought stress reduced oil production in young leaves but did not affect greatly the equilibrium reached between synthesis and removal of oils at leaf maturity. Waterlogging prolonged peak oil production. Trends in oil yields with time differed markedly between individual trees. Although genotypic variation was great, there was detectable variation attributable to site, season and year. A relationship between seasonal patterns and climatic factors could not be established. Part of the observed variation in oil yields with time was attributable to variability in leaf maturity. The relative superiority in oil-yielding capacity of certain individuals in each experiment was maintained throughout, despite substantial variation from non-genetic sources. This consistency in ranking is of advantage to tree breeders wishing to make selections amongst plantations of differing age, on different sites and at different times of the year. However, even with careful sampling controls, absolute values will vary substantially and progeny testing will be necessary to further assess the potential of the initial selections." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f74f1d96c0055c2fd46d9ac3634e31f3> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Climate change may alter mycorrhizal communities, which impact ecosystem characteristics such as carbon sequestration processes. These impacts occur at a greater magnitude in Arctic ecosystems, where the climate is warming faster than in lower latitudes. Cassiope tetragona (L.) D. Don is an Arctic plant species in the Ericaceae family with a circumpolar range. C. tetragona has been reported to form ericoid mycorrhizal (ErM) as well as ectomycorrhizal (ECM) symbioses. In this study, the fungal taxa present within roots of C. tetragona plants collected from Svalbard were investigated using DNA metabarcoding. In light of ongoing climate change in the Arctic, the effects of artificial warming by open-top chambers (OTCs) on the fungal root community of C. tetragona were evaluated. We detected only a weak effect of warming by OTCs on the root-associated fungal communities that was masked by the spatial variation between sampling sites. The root fungal community of C. tetragona was dominated by fungal groups in the Basidiomycota traditionally classified as either saprotrophic or ECM symbionts, including the orders Sebacinales and Agaricales and the genera Clavaria, Cortinarius, and Mycena. Only a minor proportion of the operational taxonomic units (OTUs) could be annotated as ErM-forming fungi. This indicates that C. tetragona may be forming mycorrhizal symbioses with typically ECM-forming fungi, although no characteristic ECM root tips were observed. Previous studies have indicated that some saprophytic fungi may also be involved in biotrophic associations, but whether the saprotrophic fungi in the roots of C. tetragona are involved in biotrophic associations remains unclear. The need for more experimental and microscopy-based studies to reveal the nature of the fungal associations in C. tetragona roots is emphasized." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d5dd472f8dfdd8a3d811584ac94583f5> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Human gnathostomosis is a severe public health problem in the State of Nayarit, Mexico. Between 1995 and 2005, the registration of human cases numbered 6,328, which makes it one of the largest focal points of the disease in the country. The present study determined the presence of natural hosts of Gnathostoma binucleatum larvae at the Laguna de Agua Brava in Nayarit, Mexico. A total of 5,450 fish and 247 turtles were sampled. Muscular tissue was ground and observed against the light using a 100-W lamp to identify advanced third-stage larvae. The estuarine species Cathorops fuerthii, Pomadasys macracanthus, Mugil curema, and Dormitator latifrons were found positive for presence of larvae, and annual prevalence was 4.8, 1.83, 2.16, and 4.0%, respectively. The species Oreochromys aureus and Chanos chanos were negative. The species of estuarine turtles Kinosternum integrum and Trachemys scripta were positive with annual prevalence of 79.1 and 52.5%, respectively. The criteria of identification of the Gnathostoma species were: mean number of nuclei in intestinal larval cells (2.3), larval morphometry with optic microscopy, larval morphometry with scanning electron microscopy, and number and sequence of ribosomal deoxyribonucleic acid of adult parasites obtained from experimental infection in dogs. The estuarine fish Pomadasys macracanthus and Mugil curema are reported as intermediate hosts for the first time and likewise the estuarine turtle Kinosternon integrum as a paratenic host." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/43af729001814359bdc54ee0683c38e9> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Predator-prey interactions between the predatory leech, Glossiphonia complanata, and its gastropod prey were investigated in laboratory experiments, including behavioural observations with the aid of time-lapse video technique. Six gastropod species were investigated, viz. Lymnaea peregra, Planorbis planorbis, Physa fontinalis, Ancylus fluviatilis, Bithynia tentaculata, and Theodoxus fluviatilis. The species studied exhibited anti-predator defences, which had their maximum efficiency at different stages of encounter with G. complanata. The activity of B. tentaculata decreased with increasing leech activity, but was relatively higher when food was present than when not. Handling times were dependent on the time elapsed since the previous meal was captured (intercatch interval), which in turn was related to the size of the previous prey. Handling time was also related to the size of both predator and prey. The capture efficiency was high for small prey and the leeches spent more time in patches with higher yield. They were, however, unable to discriminate between patches of different prey density." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4bf2c9b73c17a546adaee16dbb40ac00> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Ocean acidification alters the way in which animals perceive and respond to their world by affecting a variety of senses such as audition, olfaction, vision and pH sensing. Marine species rely on other senses as well, but we know little of how these might be affected by ocean acidification. We tested whether ocean acidification can alter the preference for physicochemical cues used for dispersal between ocean and estuarine environments. We experimentally assessed the behavioural response of a larval fish (Lates calcarifer) to elevated temperature and reduced salinity, including estuarine water of multiple cues for detecting settlement habitat. Larval fish raised under elevated CO2 concentrations were attracted by warmer water, but temperature had no effect on fish raised in contemporary CO2 concentrations. In contrast, contemporary larvae were deterred by lower salinity water, where CO2-treated fish showed no such response. Natural estuarine water—of higher temperature, lower salinity, and containing estuarine olfactory cues—was only preferred by fish treated under forecasted high CO2 conditions. We show for the first time that attraction by larval fish towards physicochemical cues can be altered by ocean acidification. Such alterations to perception and evaluation of environmental cues during the critical process of dispersal can potentially have implications for ensuing recruitment and population replenishment. Our study not only shows that freshwater species that spend part of their life cycle in the ocean might also be affected by ocean acidification, but that behavioural responses towards key physicochemical cues can also be negated through elevated CO2 from human emissions." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/3df21a81f7afc20f893b2e35377235e0> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Anisakids belong to a genus of parasitic nematodes with a life cycle involving fish and marine mammals. They cause anisakidosis (anisakiasis) by accidental ingestion of larval stage (Anisakis and other Anisakids), causing both gastrointestinal and allergic reaction in human. The aim of the current study was to report the finding of Hysterothylacium amoyense in Platycephalous indicus fishes and also its probable pathologic effect on a mouse model. In this regard, a total of 27 live third stage larvae ranging from 1.5 to 3 mm in length were collected from gut submucosa of the fish Platycephalous indicus [ZAMIN KAN] and washed up by saline 6 %, and two were characterized as Hysterothylacium amoyense by morphologic and molecular techniques. A total of 25 larvae were orally fed to 5 inbred mice (each 5). A total of 5 mice were also selected as control group; they did not receive the larvae. After 2 weeks, all mice were necropsied using ethical protocol of SUMS. Their specimens, both gross and histologic, were observed and described. Tumor-like nodules were observed in 3 out of 5 infected mice group which could be misdiagnosed as cancer. Microscopic examinations showed lymphocytic infiltration. No pathologic changes were found in the control group. The results showed an invasive anisakid, Hysterthylacium amoyense, with histopathologic features observed in the mammal model (mouse). The parasite has been found in benthic fish Platycephalous indicus in the Persian Gulf, Bushehr region, southern Iran. The parasite could be regarded as a possible source of anisakidosis in coastal populations and should be regarded as a public health problem." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/18b83c7d59595d2963f5fdaab8db2a32> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract. The mechanical frequency selectivity of the cupula located in the supraorbital lateral line canal and the frequency selectivity of the hair cells driven by the cupula were measured simultaneously in vivo. Laser interferometry was used to measure cupular mechanics and extracellular receptor potentials were recorded to determine hair cell frequency selectivity. Results were obtained from two teleost fish species, the ruffe (Acerina cernua L.), a European temperate zone freshwater fish, and the tropical African knife fish (Xenomystus nigri). In both species cupular displacement grows with increasing frequency of canal fluid displacement, reaching a maximum at 115 Hz in the ruffe and at 460 Hz in the African knife fish. Cupular best frequencies were independent of temperature. Cut-off frequencies of hair cell frequency selectivity were found to depend on temperature with a Q 10 of 1.75, ranging from 116 Hz (4°C) to 290 Hz (20°C), as established in the ruffe. At normal habitat temperatures of the two fish species (ruffe, 4°C; African knife fish, 28°C), this results in hair cell cut-off frequencies that match the two different cupular best frequencies remarkably well. This match suggests adjusted signal transfer in these two peripheral stages of canal lateral line transduction." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/82e0a1289cb6d4d73d4d8d3cabc07835> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The helminth community of Larus dominicanus (Charadriiformes) is reported from Península Valdés, on the Patagonian coast, Argentina. From March 2000 to April 2004, 29 kelp gulls were collected and dissected. All the birds were parasitized by at least 2 of 18 parasite species: 2 cestodes (1 Tetrabothriidae, 1 Dilepididae), 10 trematodes (2 Echinostomatidae, 3 Microphallidae, 2 Gymnophallidae, 1 Philophthalmidae, 1 Dicrocoeliidae, 1 Diplostomatidae), 4 nematodes (2 Acuariidae, 1 Capillaridae, 1 Anisakidae), and 2 acanthocephalans (Polymorphidae). The mean intensity was 3,204 parasites per host, and all helminths parasitized the gastrointestinal tract or associated glands. The helminth community of L. dominicanus on the Peninsula Valdés coast seems to be richer than those reported by previous authors in other localities in Argentina. This could be due to a greater diversity in prey items available. Nine species are recorded for the first time from the kelp gull and seven species are recorded for the first time from Argentina." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/64965aa8f4338d32054b9030f486a963> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Soil microbial respiration is a critical component of the global carbon cycle, but it is uncertain how properties of microbes affect this process. Previous studies have noted a thermodynamic trade-off between the rate and efficiency of growth in heterotrophic organisms. Growth rate and yield determine the biomass-specific respiration rate of growing microbial populations, but these traits have not previously been used to scale from microbial communities to ecosystems. Here we report seasonal variation in microbial growth kinetics and temperature responses (Q10) in a coniferous forest soil, relate these properties to cultured and uncultured soil microbes, and model the effects of shifting growth kinetics on soil heterotrophic respiration (Rh). Soil microbial communities from under-snow had higher growth rates and lower growth yields than the summer and fall communities from exposed soils, causing higher biomass-specific respiration rates. Growth rate and yield were strongly negatively correlated. Based on experiments using specific growth inhibitors, bacteria had higher growth rates and lower yields than fungi, overall, suggesting a more important role for bacteria in determining Rh. The dominant bacteria from laboratory-incubated soil differed seasonally: faster-growing, cold-adapted Janthinobacterium species dominated in winter and slower-growing, mesophilic Burkholderia and Variovorax species dominated in summer. Modeled Rh was sensitive to microbial kinetics and Q10: a sixfold lower annual Rh resulted from using kinetic parameters from summer versus winter communities. Under the most realistic scenario using seasonally changing communities, the model estimated Rh at 22.67 mol m−2 year−1, or 47.0% of annual total ecosystem respiration (Re) for this forest." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/668e2fe858fbc3a1430779ce3e6ec569> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Changes in total abundance and in species composition of phytoplankton in the last 150 years in the southern Black Sea were investigated through a paleoecological study of two sediment cores. The results show changes in the species composition and a marked increase in total abundance of siliceous protists after around 1960. In core 22 (42°13.534′ N/36°29.555′ E), the dominating species before 1960 were Cyclotella choctawhatcheeana and Thalassiosira oestrupii. In core 25 (42°6.212′ N/36°37.460′ E), the dominating species before 1960 were T. oestrupii, Cyclotella meneghiniana, C. choctawhatcheeana, and Pseudosolenia cf. calcar-avis. Core 22 was located in closer proximity to the rim current than core 25, and the differences in total abundance between the cores could be related to differences in local nutrient loading prior to 1960. After around 1960, both cores changed to a community dominated by C. choctawhatcheeana. The changes in total abundance and species composition after around 1960 could be related to the increased nutrient loading from the Danube River into the rim current after the late 1960s. The results also showed changes in both total abundance and in species composition of dinoflagellate cysts. The dominating dinoflagellate cysts recorded were Lingulodinium polyedrum, Polykrikos schwartzii, and Spiniferites spp." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/cacfa267566eaa7657326fd587ce78e0> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Predicting demographic consequences of climate change for plant communities requires understanding which factors influence seed set, and how climate change may alter those factors. To determine the effects of pollen availability, temperature, and pollinators on seed production in the alpine, we combined pollen-manipulation experiments with measurements of variation in temperature, and abundance and diversity of potential pollinators along a 400-m elevation gradient. We did this for seven dominant species of flowering plants in the Coast Range Mountains, British Columbia, Canada. The number of viable seeds set by plants was influenced by pollen limitation (quantity of pollen received), mate limitation (quality of pollen), temperature, abundance of potential pollinators, seed predation, and combinations of these factors. Early flowering species (n = 3) had higher seed set at high elevation and late-flowering species (n = 4) had higher seed set at low elevation. Degree-days >15 °C were good predictors of seed set, particularly in bee-pollinated species, but had inconsistent effects among species. Seed production in one species, Arnica latifolia, was negatively affected by seed-predators (Tephritidae) at mid elevation, where there were fewer frost-hours during the flowering season. Anemone occidentalis, a fly-pollinated, self-compatible species had high seed set at all elevations, likely due to abundant potential pollinators. Simultaneously measuring multiple factors affecting reproductive success of flowering plants helped identify which factors were most important, providing focus for future studies. Our work suggests that responses of plant communities to climate change may be mediated by flowering time, pollination syndrome, and susceptibility to seed predators." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/7d6f1222a60d7541a9a62d31321b1e42> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Foraminiferal assemblages has been studied in three regions of the Mekong Delta subjected to different environmental characteristics: the Tra Vinh province, in the middle part of the Delta, under high freshwater influence; the Ca Mau peninsula, to the south, under maximum marine influence; and the Can Gio region, in the northern part of the Delta, with intermediate conditions. Intensive Rice–Shrimp Farming System is developing in these regions. Foraminiferal assemblages show the prevalence of the Mekong’s water pressure. Marine influence is strong only at a few stations along the shoreline, mainly in the Can Gio region. The rarity of allochthonous coastal species, in all the samples except one, suggests that up-river transport and settlement of foraminifera and sediment is significant only in the major channels. On a local level, foraminiferal assemblages provide a variety of information on environmental conditions. In a tidal channel of the Tra Vinh province, they suggest that lower reaches are more impacted by pollution than upper reaches; in the Ca Mau peninsula, under marine influence, low density and dominance of agglutinated species indicate the impact of deforestation and extension of acid sulfate soils; in shrimp pools, foraminifera may be used as indicators of the degradation of local conditions, in relation with accumulation of organic matter. The distribution of foraminiferal assemblages described in this study should be used as part of a reference point for further observations with a view to assessing environmental impacts of increasing human activities and/or climatic change." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/45ee9a4dd6b83b1600eee022cb46efc6> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract African savannahs are among the few places on earth where diverse communities of mega- and meso-sized ungulate grazers dominate ecosystem functioning. Less conspicuous, but even more diverse, are the communities of herbivorous insects such as grasshoppers, which share the same food. Various studies investigated the community assembly of these groups separately, but it is poorly known how ungulate communities shape grasshopper communities. Here, we investigated how ungulate species of different body size alter grasshopper communities in a South African savannah. White rhino is the most abundant vertebrate herbivore in our study site. Other common mesoherbivores include buffalo, zebra and impala. We hypothesized that white rhinos would have greater impact than mesoherbivores on grasshopper communities. Using 10-year-old exclosures, at eight sites we compared the effects of ungulates on grasshopper communities in three nested treatments: (i) unfenced plots (‘control plots’) with all vertebrate herbivores present, (ii) plots with a low cable fence, excluding white rhino (‘megaherbivore exclosures’), and (iii) plots with tall fences, excluding all herbivores larger than rodents (‘complete ungulate exclosures’). In each plot, we collected data of vegetation structure, grass and grasshopper community composition. Complete ungulate exclosures contained 30 % taller vegetation than megaherbivore exclosures and they were dominated by different grass and grasshopper species. Grasshoppers in complete ungulate exclosures were on average 3.5 mm longer than grasshoppers in megaherbivore exclosures, possibly due to changes in plant communities or vegetation structure. We conclude that surprisingly, in this megaherbivore hotspot, mesoherbivores, instead of megaherbivores, most strongly affect grasshopper communities." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/28f2443c99b0d9140aa2350f45be680e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract  Seedlings of Eucalyptus tereticornis (Smith) were grown under two levels of availability each of CO2 (352 and 793 µmol mol−1), soil nutrients (1/24 and 1/4 Hoagland’s solution) and light (full and 30% sunlight). Low soil nutrient availability or high light increased the C:N ratio of leaves, leading to lower leaf nitrogen concentrations, higher leaf specific weights and higher levels of both total phenolics and condensed tannins. These results were consistent with other studies of the effect of environmental resource availability on foliage composition. Similar results were observed when the C:N ratio of leaves was increased under elevated CO2. The changes in leaf chemistry induced by the treatments affected the performance of 4th-instar larvae of Chrysophtharta flaveola (Chapuis) fed on the leaves. Increased C:N ratios of leaves reduced digestive efficiencies and pupal body sizes and increased mortality. Below a threshold nitrogen concentration of approximately 1% dry mass, severe reductions in the performance of larvae were recorded. Such changes may have significant consequences for herbivores of Eucalyptus, particularly in view of projected increases in atmospheric CO2." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/52e8527c4fe63328c166041b0e27b73e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Techniques for the primary culture of fish gill epithelia on permeable supports have provided ‘reconstructed’ gill models appropriate for the study of gill permeability characteristics in vitro. Models developed thus far have been derived from euryhaline fish species that can tolerate a wide range of environmental salinity. This study reports on procedures for the primary culture of a model gill epithelium derived from goldfish, a stenohaline freshwater (FW) fish that cannot tolerate high environmental salt concentrations. The reconstructed goldfish gill epithelium was cultured on permeable filter inserts and using electron microscopy and immunocytochemical techniques, was determined to be composed exclusively of gill pavement cells. When cultured under symmetrical conditions (i.e. with culture medium bathing both apical and basolateral surfaces), epithelial preparations generated appreciable transepithelial resistance (TER) (e.g. 1,150 ± 46 Ωcm2) within 36–42 h post-seeding in inserts. When apical medium was replaced with FW (asymmetrical conditions to mimic conditions that occur in vivo), epithelia exhibited increased TER and elevated paracellular permeability. Changes in permeability occurred in association with altered occludin-immunoreactive band position by western blot and no change in occludin mRNA abundance. We contend that the goldfish gill model will provide a useful in vitro tool for examining the molecular components of a stenohaline fish gill epithelium that participate in the regulation of gill permeability. The model will allow molecular observations to be made together with assessment of changing physiological properties that relate to permeability. Together, this will allow further insight into mechanisms that regulate gill permeability in fishes." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2383a2638b12615fc81dfc4c7552e215> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The efficiency of a natural enemy combination compared to a single species release for the control of western flower thrips (WFT) Frankliniella occidentalis (Pergande) on cucumber plants was investigated. Since a large part of F. occidentalis seems to enter the soil passage, a joint release of the plant-inhabiting predatory mite Amblyseius cucumeris (Oudemans) that feeds on thrips first-instar larvae and the soil-dwelling predatory mite Hypoaspis aculeifer (Canestrini) that preys on thrips pupae in the ground might offer a promising approach for a holistic control strategy. Therefore, two sets of experiments were conducted in cooperation with a commercial vegetable grower where the plants in plots were infested with a defined number of larval and adult F. occidentalis. Two species of natural enemies were released either synchronously or solely, and their efficacy was compared to control plots devoid of antagonists. In both experiments, the predatory mites were released twice with a density of 46 A. cucumeris/m2, and 207 H. aculeifer/m2 (low-density) in the first experiment and 528 H. aculeifer/m2 (high-density) in the second one. Population growth of all arthropod species on the plants and in the soil was quantified at regular intervals and included all soil-dwelling mites and alternative preys present in the substrate. The results showed that H. aculeifer alone had a significant impact on thrips population development only when released at high-densities, but competence was lower compared to the other antagonist treatments. The impact of A. cucumeris alone and A. cucumeris and H. aculeifer combined was similar. Thus, the pooled exploitation of natural enemies did not boost thrips control compared to the single species application of A. cucumeris (non-additive effect), which could be explained by resource competition between both predatory mite species. Species number and population size in the soil of the experimental plots both showed a high variability, a possible consequence of their interaction with released soil-dwelling predatory H. aculeifer mites. The impact of resource competition and presence of alternative preys on thrips biological control is exhaustively discussed. From our study, we can extract the subsequent conclusions: (1) the combined use of H. aculeifer and A. cucumeris cannot increase thrips control on cucumber compared to the release of A. cucumeris alone, but the overall reliability of thrips biological control might be enhanced, (2) the availability of alternative preys seemed to affect the thrips predation rate of H. aculeifer, and (3) the impact of naturally occurring soil predatory mites on the control of WFT seemed to be partial." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ae691899fb16d0293c0e5a9495b3f8a2> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract: Despite a recent suggestion of Chulkov, et al., we find no evidence for a tetra-proton cluster in 20Mg. The binding energy and radius are easily understood without such a cluster." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/336ec519e350d42d0af769440bd2bdcd> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Ocean acidification studies in the past decade have greatly improved our knowledge of how calcifying organisms respond to increased surface ocean CO2 levels. It has become evident that, for many organisms, nutrient availability is an important factor that influences their physiological responses and competitive interactions with other species. Therefore, we tested how simulated ocean acidification and eutrophication (nitrate and phosphate enrichment) interact to affect the physiology and ecology of a calcifying chlorophyte macroalga (Halimeda opuntia (L.) J.V. Lamouroux) and its common noncalcifying epiphyte (Dictyota sp.) in a 4-week fully crossed multifactorial experiment. Inorganic nutrient enrichment (+NP) had a strong influence on all responses measured with the exception of net calcification. Elevated CO2 alone significantly decreased electron transport rates of the photosynthetic apparatus and resulted in phosphorus limitation in both species, but had no effect on oxygen production or respiration. The combination of CO2 and +NP significantly increased electron transport rates in both species. While +NP alone stimulated H. opuntia growth rates, Dictyota growth was significantly stimulated by nutrient enrichment only at elevated CO2, which led to the highest biomass ratios of Dictyota to Halimeda. Our results suggest that inorganic nutrient enrichment alone stimulates several aspects of H. opuntia physiology, but nutrient enrichment at a CO2 concentration predicted for the end of the century benefits Dictyota sp. and hinders its calcifying basibiont H. opuntia." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9f1c2b6dfccca1ba442c8fbb54cad4f5> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Succulent plants representing 16 families and a variety of growth forms originating from winter, summer, and year-round rainfall regimes in southern Africa were analyzed for carbon isotope ratios. Most families had species with δ13C values indicative of CAM, particularly those from winter and year-round rainfall regimes. Plants with δ13C values intermediate between CAM and C3, indicating flexible photosynthetic pathways, were generally leafy perennials subject to seasonal tissue dehydration. Reproductive tissue tended to have less negative δ13C values than vegetative tissue on the same plant, indicating drought-season origin of the former." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/cb70666a7c9979809f80631eb8b0619f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Populations of invasive species tend to have fewer parasites in their introduced ranges than in their native ranges and are also thought to have fewer parasites than native prey. This ‘release’ from parasites has unstudied implications for native predators feeding on exotic prey. In particular, shifts from native to exotic prey should reduce levels of trophically transmitted parasites. We tested this hypothesis in native populations of pumpkinseed sunfish (Lepomis gibbosus) in Lake Opinicon, where fish stomach contents were studied intensively in the 1970s, prior to the appearance of exotic zebra mussels (Dreissena polymorpha) in the mid-1990s. Zebra mussels were common in stomachs of present-day pumpkinseeds, and stable isotopes of carbon and nitrogen confirmed their importance in long-term diets. Because historical parasite data were not available in Lake Opinicon, we also surveyed stomach contents and parasites in pumpkinseed in both Lake Opinicon and an ecologically similar, neighboring lake where zebra mussels were absent. Stomach contents of pumpkinseed in the companion lake did not differ from those of pre-invasion fish from Lake Opinicon. The companion lake, therefore, served as a surrogate “pre-invasion” reference to assess effects of zebra mussel consumption on parasites in pumpkinseed. Trophically transmitted parasites were less species-rich and abundant in Lake Opinicon, where fish fed on zebra mussels, although factors other than zebra mussel consumption may contribute to these differences. Predation on zebra mussels has clearly contributed to a novel trophic coupling between littoral and pelagic food webs in Lake Opinicon." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8e960c61f5e91ea808556083a0d35486> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract A demographic investigation was conducted to assess variation in life history of Polymnia canadensis (Asteraceae), a geographically-widespread, herbaceous species of deciduous forests in eastern North America. During 1985-1994, 23,063 seedlings of P. canadensis were monitored at five central Kentucky study sites. Numbers at the end were: biennials, 554; triennials, 142; winter annuals, 16; monocarpic perennials, 2; tricarpic perennials (three years), 3; and dicarpic perennials (some skipped years) that matured in the first year of life, 23; in the second year, 60; and in the third year, 9. Weekly cohorts of P. canadensis generally exhibited Deevey Type III survivorship with highest seedling mortality in summer associated with low soil moisture. Wide spatial variation in life history was displayed by the fact that fall germination cohorts at dry sites generally had greater germination and survivorship than at mesic sites during seedling establishment, while the reverse was true for spring cohorts. This led to more reproductive individuals in fall germination cohorts than spring cohorts at dry sites and generally the opposite case at mesic sites. Forest shade in mesic sites caused slower growth and a greater frequency of longer-lived reproductive individuals than in open, dry sites, but it also resulted in higher survivorship than at dry sites during moderate drought. Annual population growth rate averaged across four years was not significantly different between a dry site and mesic site, indicating that despite forest shade, P. canadensis persisted in the mesic site as well as it did in the dry site. Population structure varied among years, seasons, and study sites; at two study plots, a 2-year flowering cycle of mass seeding and senescence persisted for 4 years. At a smaller scale, there was little difference in survivorship between study plots within sites or between quadrats within study plots, while in a few instances there were large differences in the number of reproductive individuals. Weekly cohorts that germinated early within seasonal cohorts had greater number of reproductive individuals than later weekly cohorts, but not consistently greater survivorship. Several droughts induced temporal variation that was as important as spatial variation. During these droughts, the population size of all cohorts that germinated prior to the droughts declined to zero at all sites, and biennials were the longest lived type of reproductive individuals. During drought, Deevey Type I survivorship was prevalent, and lack of seed rain led to dependence on persistent seed banks for recruitment in some seasonal cohorts." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/356fe089dd099252eacc7b888288ac63> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Strzeleckia major n. g., n. sp. and S. minor n. sp. are described from the dusky antechinus Antechinus swainsonii (Marsupialia: Dasyuridae) from the Kosciusko National Park in southern New South Wales, Australia. The two species were found together in the same individual host animals but occupy different sites in the intestine. The new genus is placed within the Hasstilesiidae, where it differs from the only other genus, Hasstilesia, by being more elongate and in having larger suckers, tandem testes, the ovary between rather than opposite the testes, and in having the caeca not reaching the posterior end of the body. It is suggested that the life-cycles of these species are similar to those of other hasstilesiids. Pupillid snails may act as sole intermediate hosts." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e0653a278853b6b30caba308c19b5071> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The existence of dams cannot be ignored. The dam-lake formed due to the construction of a dam can be considered an integrated part of the natural watershed. A question which must be answered is how to operate a dam-lake so that the negative impacts of the dam on the natural flow system are reduced and at the same time the intended purposes of the dam are efficiently met. Among many aquatic species, the fish species are probably the most highly impacted species by the construction of a dam. As a result of the dam, fish habitat can decrease resulting in low productivity to no productivity at all for some fish species. This paper presents a methodology to develop a dam-lake operation model to maximize fish habitat. This study considered the physical habitat of smallmouth bass in its adult life. The operation model is developed by linking one-dimensional hydraulics model HEC-2 and dam-lake simulation model HEC-5 with a meta-heuristic optimization algorithm, the Shuffled Frog Leaping Algorithm (SFLA). The computation of physical habitat, which is a function of habitat suitability index and some hydraulic parameters, is coded within the optimization algorithm. The model has been successfully applied to an unnamed dam-lake in the northeast of the U.S. The fish habitat for smallmouth bass in its adult life stage increases as the water surface in the dam-lake increases. Some recommendations to improve the model are discussed in the conclusions section." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/404ecb5652e256dc42cbd9e4a8ca09d8> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary In contrast to the well studied tropical carbonate environments, interest in non-tropical carbonate deposition was rather low until the basic ideas of theForamol-concept were outlined byLees & Buller (1972). In the following two decades studies on non-tropical carbonate settings evolved as a new and exciting branch of carbonate sedimentology (seeNelson 1988). This is archieved in a great number of publications dealing on temperate carbonate deposits from numerous coastal and open shelf settings on both hemispheres. The existence of wide extended carbonate depositional systems and even reefal frameworks in Subarctic and Arctic seas which are in focus by our research group made it possible to study modern non-tropical carbonate settings along a latitudinal transect from the warm-temperate Mediterranean Sea to the cold Nordic Seas. Because of increasing seasonality in environmental conditions towards high latitudes, the major controls in biogenic carbonate production can be more clearly addressed in these areas. After the initiation of the priority program “Global and regional controlling processes of biogenic sedimentation-evolution of reefs” by the German Science Foundation four years ago, a set of modern case studies were comparatively analysed specifically with regard to their principle controlling processes:(1)Modern and Holocene coralline algal reefs and rhodolith pavements formed in wave-protected shallow waters along the coast of the Brittany and northern Norway. Their finetuned interaction with herbivores resulted in the development of widespread but low-diverse, slowly growing coralline algal frameworks with high competitive value against the rapid-growing phaeophytic communities.(2)The MediterraneanCladocora caespitosa-banks provide an instructive example of non-tropical hermatypic coral framework construction out of the subtropical-tropical coral reef belt.(3)The geometry and environmental controls of several kilometer long coral reefs formed by the azooxanthellateLophelia pertusa andMadrepora oculata are studied in more than 250 m water depth in mid and northern Norway.(4)ModernBryomol-sediments are widely distributed on non-tropical deeper shelf settings. The formational processes converting bryozoan-thickets into huge piles of sand and gravel dunes are recently studied on the outer shelves off northern Brittany and off northern Norway.(5)Arctic sponge-bryozoan buildups on the seamount Vesterisbank in the Greenland Sea and(6)balanid-dominated open shelf carbonates on the Spitsbergen Bank form the Arctic endmembers of modernForamol-deposits. Seasonalice-edge phytoplankton blooms and efficient mechanisms of pelagic-benthic food transfer characterize these depositional settings. Fossil counterparts of each of these modern case studies are discussed in context with their paleoceanographic and environmental settings." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a62601ff56da9ba3efdb4fa0582ad8d9> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Factors governing the size of territories defended by the pomacentrid reef fish, Parma victoriae, were investigated, prompted by contradictory predictions in the literature concerning the effects of food supply and competitors. Observations were carried out over the non-breeding period (March–October) on a medium density population in which territories were partially contiguous. The territory size of adult fish varied between 3 and 26 m2, and was inversely correlated with local densities of conspecifics. The same range in territory size was found for both males and females, which did not differ in the time they spent on territory defence and foraging activities. No correlation existed between territory size and the abundance of algal food, body size, age or time spent on territory defence. Also, there was little variation in territory size over time, despite seasonal changes in the abundance of food algae. Experimental reduction of food supplies on isolated territories of males and females had no effect on territory size. In a higher density habitat an experiment was carried out in which population density and food abundance were simultaneously manipulated. This showed that territory size was primarily determined by intraspecific interactions, as territories exhibited considerable increases in size upon removal of neighbours. No changes in the size of defended areas resulted from either artificial increases or decreases of food levels. There were also no changes in the time spent on defence of territories, foraging time or feeding rates associated with food manipulations or territory expansion, which suggested that food was not a limited resource. This conflicted with current theories proposed to explain territory defence and expansion. It is hypothesized that intraspecific interactions constrain territory size well below the optimum in terms of the abundance of preferred food algal species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/6acfb07931072f50e044612a3d23cc40> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Distribution, abundance, and community structure were studied over a 30 month period in the planktonic copepod community of the estuaries near Beaufort, North Carolina. Many of the copepod species showed a demersal distribution during the day and entered the surface waters at night. Several species were largely confined to vegetated littoral areas during the day. The copepod community showed consistent trends of seasonal abundance and succession of dominant species which differed greatly from those found by previous workers, whose methods were inadequate to sample quantitatively the small, demersal copepods which dominated the community. Copepod abundances were higher than found in previous studies and were correlated with water temperature. Species composition changed from a winter community dominated byCentropages spp., to a spring community dominated byAcartia tonsa, to a summer community jointly dominated byParacalanus crassirostris andOithona spp. Copepods were much more important grazers in these estuaries than previous studies had concluded." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a9399152cd4e8742bae001ca26c1af55> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Three species of freshwater fishes, namelyO. punctatus, M. vittatus andB. stigma, were taken to establish the effect of temperature on the frequency of heart beat. InO. punctatus, experiments were made on three different size groups to illustrate the differences in the heart rate between older and younger individuals. The response of heart in all the species is very similar. The decrease in temperature is accompanied with a fall in the frequency of heart beat and its subsequent increase is followed by a steady rise. Younger individuals show greater susceptibility to temperature changes than the juveniles and the adults. The temperature characteristics of the heart rate have also been studied by using temperature coefficients Q10 andμ. Both these coefficients have been found to vary and it is suggested that the heart rate like other biological processes of poikilothermous animals is dependent on an optimum range of temperature as both high and low lead to an inhibition of vital activity." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8729c6a16b17f69abce988bbf4452810> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract A central issue in population ecology is to determine the structure of negative feedback-density depend process which regulates population dynamics and seasonal fluctuations. In this work the incidence of population density dependences and seasonality was examined in fruit orchards of three closely related pest species (Adoxophyes orana, Anarsia lineatella and (Grapholita) Grapholitha molesta). Analysis included 13 moth population time series during 2003–2011. Additionally, considering that time lags and seasonality are fundamental characteristics of ecological organisation and pest management, the work aimed to introduce a step wise algorithm to detect significant population feedbacks, moth seasonality and population synchronisation of nearby locations. In the proposed procedure, each population-time series was first analysed on the basis of autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation. Moreover, assuming that each of the ecological variable, observed at successive time points, consist of a stochastic process, autoregressive moving average ARMA(p,q) models and seasonal autoregressive moving average models SARMA(p,q)x(P,Q) S were fitted on data. The Akaike information criteria was further used by the stepwise algorithm for parameter optimization and model improvement. Model construction is accompanied by a presentation of the fitting results and a discussion of the heuristic benchmarks used to assess the forecasting performance of the models. Life cycles of populations belonging to same species appeared to synchronise by terms of their autocorrelation functions. Delayed density dependence and order was in most cases of lag:1 and 2, while lag >3 was not found more frequently as expected by chance. In A. orana and A. lineatella moth species lag = 1 delayed density dependence was significantly more frequent and in particular in nearby locations. However, the structure of the fitted models varied with respect to species and observation region. In some cases, seasonal models were considered to be more accurate in simulating moth population dynamics. Finally, to provide means in forecasting moth emergence and abundance, utile in pest management, the models were trained using 2003–2009 data sets and their forecasting performance were validated for each case using data sets of 2010–2011. In most cases, the constructed stochastic linear autoregressive models simulated the population outbreaks very well. Describing and forecasting stochastic population fluctuations is a basic tenet of theoretical and applied ecology, while detecting the relative roles of exogenous and endogenous mechanisms can partly describe the phenomenological behavior of pest population time series data and improve pest management." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/222bb537f11573d049b8e5c67e5230d8> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Anelasma squalicola is a barnacle found attached to deep-water lantern sharks of the family Etmopteridae and is the only known cirriped on fish hosts. While A. squalicola is equipped with mouth and thoracic appendages (cirri), which are used for suspension feeding in conventional barnacles, its attachment device (peduncle) appears to have evolved into a feeding device, embedded into the tissue of its host. Here we demonstrate, through comparisons of the feeding apparatuses between A. squalicola and conventional suspension-feeding barnacles, that mouthparts and cirri of A. squalicola are highly reduced, and incapable of suspension-feeding activities. We show that in conventional suspension-feeding barnacles strong symmetries exist within these vital trophic structures. In A. squalicola strong asymmetries are widespread, indicating that those structures have been uncoupled from natural selection. The digestive tract is consistently empty, suggesting that feeding via cirri does not occur in A. squalicola. In addition, comparisons of stable isotope ratios (δ13C and δ15N) between A. squalicola, its shark host, and a conventional suspending feeding barnacle indicate that A. squalicola is taking nutrition directly from its host shark and not from the surrounding water. Our results strongly indicate that this barnacle has abandoned suspension feeding and now solely relies on obtaining nutrition from its host by a de novo evolved feeding mechanism." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e3db589bdd2504ebd50e9061d1ef93b2> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Diets of grasshopper species from two arid grassland communities in Trans-Pecos, Texas, were determined by gut analysis. Species-specific food plant choice and niche breadths are presented for each of these species. As a group, grasshoppers range from monophagous to polyphagous feeders although most species fall in the oligophagous to polyphagous group. Phylogenetic constraints are evident such that gomphocerinae are primarily grass feeders while melanoplinae feed predominantly on forbs; the oedipodinae show less clearcut tendencies. Feeding patterns are remarkably constant from site to site and overall, community niche breadth distributions between sites do not differ greatly. Individual species tend to eat the same plant species at various sites and maintain similar niche breadths. Species with relatively specialized diets tend to feed on predictable plant species such as grasses and long-lived perrenial forbs. Grasshopper feeding patterns present some problems to the current theory of herbivore diet specialization since forb feeding melanoplines tend to be polyphagous (contrary to predictions). Life history patterns unrelated to tracking host plants may explain some aspects of diet breadth since diet selectivities are presumably adjusted according to the probability of finding suitable food plants." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/7ff858285aa4173cbde7cd349a49252c> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Understanding the relationship between invasive species density and ecological impact is a pressing topic in ecology, with implications for environmental management and policy. Although it is widely assumed that invasive species impact will increase with density, theory suggests interspecific competition may diminish at high densities due to increased intraspecific interactions. To test this theory, we experimentally examined intra- and interspecific interactions between a globally invasive fish, round goby (Neogobius melanostomus), and three native species at different round goby densities in a tributary of the Laurentian Great Lakes. Eighteen 2.25 m2 enclosures were stocked with native fish species at natural abundances, while round gobies were stocked at three different densities: 0 m−2, 2.7 m−2, and 10.7 m−2. After 52 days, native fish growth rate was significantly reduced in the low density goby treatment, while growth in the high density goby treatment mirrored the goby-free treatment for two of three native species. Invertebrate density and gut content weight of native fishes did not differ among treatments. Conversely, gut content weight and growth of round gobies were lower in the high goby density treatment, suggesting interactions between round gobies and native fishes are mediated by interference competition amongst gobies. Our experiment provides evidence that invasive species effects may diminish at high densities, possibly due to increased intraspecific interactions. This is consistent with some ecological theory, and cautions against the assumption that invasive species at moderate densities have low impact." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/818c4aaf18c5bcf97cf03a4eb383622e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The concentrations of 11 perfluorinated alkyl acids (PFAAs) were measured in the livers of foxes (Vulpes vulpes) from Germany, a primarily carnivorous species, and chamois (Rupicapra rupicapra) from Austria, an herbivorous species. Perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) at concentrations [all results refer to wet weight (ww)] of 3.2–320 µg/kg were detected in all 40 fox livers tested, yielding an arithmetic mean of 46.6 µg/kg and a median of 29.8 µg/kg. Long-chain PFAAs were detected at concentrations of 1.7 µg/kg perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA) to 2.4 µg/kg perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA) and perfluorododecanoic acid (PFDoDA). Of the short-chain PFAAs tested, only perfluorohexanoic acid (PFHxA) was found in 1 fox liver at a concentration of 1.4 µg/kg, and perfluorohexane sulfonate (PFHxS) was found in 2 fox livers at a concentration of 1 µg/kg each. PFOS and PFNA concentrations higher than limit of quantification (LOQ) were detected in 90.9 and 81.8 % of chamois livers, respectively. The arithmetic mean for PFOS concentrations was 2.2 µg/kg (median 2.4 µg/kg), a factor of 21 (median factor of 12) lower than in fox livers. The arithmetic mean for PFNA concentrations was 2.0 µg/kg (median 1.9 µg/kg). Perfluorobutanoic acid, PFHxA, perfluorooctanoic acid, perfluorobutanesulfonate, and PFHxS were not detected at concentrations higher than the LOQ in any of the samples. The various results are compared with one another and with the results of other studies of herbivorous, carnivorous, and omnivorous wild animals. The highest concentrations of PFAA, in particular PFOS, were found in omnivorous animals followed by carnivores. The lowest levels were present in herbivores." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/54250397fee16fb884c6a22376fdda47> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Herbivory is widely acknowledged as a key process determining the benthic community structure and resilience of coral reefs. Despite numerous studies that have examined herbivory across reef gradients in the Caribbean, few studies have directly quantified this process on Pacific reefs. Bioassays of two species of erect macroalgae (Sargassum swartzii and S. cristaefolium) were used to quantify variation in grazing intensity across seven habitats of varying depth and wave exposure on a mid-shelf reef in the northern Great Barrier Reef. Removal rates of Sargassum varied significantly among habitats, with both species displaying broadly similar patterns. The shallow habitats on the exposed aspect of the reef (i.e. reef crest, flat and back reef) experienced the highest reductions in mass (81.4–91.6% day−1) for both S. swartzii and S. cristaefolium, while the deeper exposed habitats (reef slope and base) displayed the lowest reductions (3.8–13.4% day−1) over a 24 h period. In contrast, the grazing intensity varied between the two species in the three habitats on the leeward aspect of the reef. Reductions in mass remained relatively high for S. swartzii on the patch reef and sheltered reef base and flat (62.7–76.5% day−1) but were considerably lower for S. cristaefolium (37.9–63.5% day−1) across the same habitats. Surprisingly, the rates of removal of Sargassum displayed no relationship with the density or biomass of roving herbivorous fishes or those species known to consume erect macroalgae, either collectively or independently. These results suggest that the relationship between browsing rates and herbivorous fish biomass is complex and may be driven by species that are underestimated in visual surveys. Direct quantification of browsing intensity using assays revealed a different pattern to inferences based on herbivore densities and highlights the potential difficulties of evaluating ecosystem processes based on visual census data alone." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/46cd6664e3099d4d7836580065f238ff> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The niche variation hypothesis predicts a direct relationship between intraspecific variability in feeding ecology and the variability of the morphological traits related to feeding behaviour. The following study tests this prediction by measuring in captivity the seed size preferences and the morphology of 9–11 individuals of seven specialized granivorous bird species. The average seed size preferences of these birds have previously been shown to be related to components of bill size. The ranges of seed sizes selected were related to the mean bill sizes of birds in a way that paralleled the patterns found when analysing average values. Bill and body size variability were not related, however, to the range of seed preferences after controlling for the significant mean-variance relationship showed by morphological traits. Thus, results do not support the niche variation hypothesis. the significant effect of average bill size on diet variability was consistent with the direct relationship between bird size and ecological plasticity expected on the basis of the shape of the family of functions relating seed size and seed profitability for different-sized birds. These findings suggest morphological mechanisms for ecological plasticity whose generality and evolutionary significance merit further research." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/fdc65605c0a04d57b22f2a19f8b92503> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Interactions between predators foraging in the same patch may strongly influence patch use and functional response. In particular, there is continued interest in how the magnitude of mutual interference shapes predator–prey interactions. Studies commonly focus on either patch use or the functional response without attempting to link these important components of the foraging puzzle. Predictions from both theoretical frameworks suggest that predators should modify foraging efforts in response to changes in feeding rate, but this prediction has received little empirical attention. We study the linkage between patch departure rates and food consumption by the hunting spider, Pardosa milvina, using field enclosures in which prey and predator densities were manipulated. Additionally, the most appropriate functional response model was identified by fitting alternative functional response models to laboratory foraging data. Our results show that although prey availability was the most important determinant of patch departure rates, a greater proportion of predators left enclosures containing elevated predator abundance. Functional response parameter estimation revealed significant levels of interference among predators leading to lower feeding rates even when the area allocated for each predator was kept constant. These results suggest that feeding rates determine patch movement dynamics, where interference induces predators to search for foraging sites that balance the frequency of agonistic interactions with prey encounter rates." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/049a979e8f7b1ecd7e88417a1984637f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The appearance of Mesocyclops leuckarti (Claus) in Lake Kinneret was found to be as a population with mixed age structure present throughout the year, when average epilimnic temperatures varied between 14 to 28°C. Some Physiological features were studied, at three temperatures (15, 22, and 27°C), in order to give an insight into such an occurrence: the development time of instars, egg production, longevity, ammonia excretion, food intake and oxygen consumption of adult females. It is suggested that the high rate of metabolism and respiration and smaller body size at 22–27°C is compensated for by the higher rate of development of the offspring and egg production of the adult females." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/13e52e3787151baeec4ca6cc47a1b81d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Published results show that variations in mortality due to factors such as predation, parasitism and disease are overshadowed by variations due to effects of physical factors. Soil temperature and the tension of the soil moisture have a profound effect not only on the survival but also on the growth rate and fertility of the two species considered here. The model is based largely upon known and experimentally quantified relationships of causes and effects and is therefore a practical model which integrates our knowledge so that we can compare its results with reality to see if or where our knowledge is lacking." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/bcf05cfd20537b8727565328d6c709dc> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Human activities accelerate the input of plant nutrients sourced from agriculture, industrial waste, and sewage in the Hooghly River at the land ocean boundary of Indian Sunderban mangrove (21°32′–22°40′ N and 88°05′–89° E). This study reports seasonal fluctuations in the phytoplankton assemblage and the relationship between phytoplankton abundance and key environmental parameters in a highly eutrophic system. As far as seasonal perspective, the Hooghly estuarine system dominated by mangrove suffered complete change in terms of phytoplankton and other key parameters during monsoon compared to other times of the year. Diatoms were more abundant than dinoflagellates throughout all seasons with 58 species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/075daf2e2e375e3e5b7057955deda2a1> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Bones contain the majority of body lipid in some marine fish. In the sheepshead wrasse Pimelometopon pulchrum and the sablefish Anoplopoma fimbria, the bone lipid comprised 79 to 93% and 52 to 82% of the total body lipid, respectively. The senorita Oxyjulus california, another species of wrasse, has only 14% of its body lipid in bone. To determine whether dietary lipid is deposited quickly in the bone lipid, three species of fish were fed 1-14C-palmitic acid. Radioactivity appeared in the bone lipid as soon as 12 h after feeding, with the species rich in bone lipid incorporating the highest activity relative to the flesh. Roughly 80% of the radioactivity recovered in A. fimbria bone lipid was found in triglyceride. Radioactivity was equally distributed between phospholipid and triglyceride in P. pulchrum bone lipids. The results suggest that in some marine fish the bones contain the majority of the organism's reserve energy." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d1a4ba1e447fe33b3317b14bb82b89d1> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Although exposure of mosquito larvae to agricultural chemicals such as herbicides is common and widespread, our understanding of how these chemicals affect mosquito ecology and behavior is limited. This study investigated how an environmentally relevant concentration of two herbicides, atrazine and glyphosate, affects mosquito life history traits. One hundred and fifty (150) first instar Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti (L.) or Aedes (Stegomyia) albopictus (Skuse) larvae were reared in 1.6 L of live oak leaf (Quercus virginiana) infusion in the presence (5 mg/L) or absence (0 mg/L) of atrazine or glyphosate. The containers were monitored daily to determine the emergence rates, sex ratio, male and female emergence times, and female body size. Emergence rates of A. aegypti from atrazine treatment were significantly higher relative to either glyphosate or control treatments (A. aegypti: atrazine = 93 ± 6 % (±95 % CI), glyphosate = 82 ± 5 %, control = 78 ± 5 %), while emergence rates of A. albopictus in atrazine treatments were significantly higher than in glyphosate treatments but not in controls (A. albopictus: atrazine = 84 ± 5 %, glyphosate = 76 ± 4 %, control = 78 ± 4 %). For both mosquito species, a sex ratio distortion with male bias was observed in control and glyphosate treatments, but not in atrazine treatments (A. aegypti: atrazine = 0.90 ± 0.17 (±SE), glyphosate = 1.63 ± 0.21, control = 1.69 ± 0.26; A. albopictus: atrazine = 1.09 ± 0.08, glyphosate = 1.88 ± 0.12, control = 1.37 ± 0.11). Emergence times for both sexes of the two mosquito species were significantly longer in atrazine treatments compared to glyphosate or control treatments (A. aegypti: females: atrazine = 11.20 ± 0.50 (days ± 95 % CI), glyphosate = 9.71 ± 0.23, control = 9.87 ± 0.21; males: atrazine = 9.46 ± 0.27, glyphosate = 8.80 ± 0.25, control = 8.85 ± 0.24; A. albopictus: females: atrazine = 17.40 ± 1.70, glyphosate = 12.4 ± 0.40, control = 12.5 ± 0.30; males: atrazine = 12.96 ± 0.41, glyphosate = 10.48 ± 0.24, control = 10.64 ± 0.37). For A. albopictus but not A. aegypti, adult females from atrazine treatment had significantly longer wing lengths compared to those from glyphosate or control treatments (A. albopictus: atrazine = 3.06 ± 0.07 (mm ± 95 % CI), glyphosate = 2.80 ± 0.07, control = 2.83 ± 0.06). These results demonstrate the potential for atrazine, a widely used herbicide, to influence epidemiologically relevant life history traits of mosquitoes." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2a9fb4d738a2d460f246ea9867a26608> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Two new species of stygophilic tanaidomorphs are described from El Hierro (Canary Islands) and the Spanish Mediterranean coast from samples collected both at caves and open marine environments. Both species lack autapomorphies but are described based on their unique combination of characters. Pseudotanais isabelae sp. nov. is characterized by the presence of eyes and forcipate chelas, absence of outer seta in article 2 of maxilliped, absence of tubercles on the endite of the maxilliped, presence of 2–6 blade-like spines on the pereopods and presence of one segment on the endopod of the uropod. Zeuxo bimbache sp. nov. is diagnosed by the presence of three aesthetascs on the terminal article of the antennule, laccinia mobilis not articulated on the right mandible, wide and crenulated on the left one; basis of the maxilliped with serrated margin, article 1 of the palp without outer seta, anterior process of the coxa naked, unique chaetotaxy of the pleopods, and endopod of the uropod with three articles. These two species represent the first stygophilic members of the genera Pseudotanais and Zeuxo. Araphura brevimanus (Lilljeborg 1864) and Chondrochelia savignyi (Krøyer 1842) are also reported from our cave samples. An updated checklist of all 24 tanaidaceans recorded in caves is provided, with data on their ecological characterization and degree of troglomorphism. The ecological preferences and affinities of all tanaidaceans present in caves is briefly discussed, and compared with those of other peracarids." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/93df2f492ef47bcc8401a9824c48b457> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Birdsong differs from other sexual traits in that the acquisition process involves learning. Especially in close-ended learning species like the Bengalese finch, conditions experienced during the critical song-learning period can have a profound influence on song quality. Therefore, to understand song evolution from a life-history perspective, we investigated early ontogenetic effects on song quality. In particular, we focused on maternal effects and sibling competition. In asynchronously hatching bird species, the age hierarchy among nestlings affects physical development due to competition for food; mothers may influence this competition by adjusting their investment in each egg according to its sequence in the laying order. To independently assess these effects, chicks of the Bengalese finch were cross-fostered so that the age hierarchies formed in fostered broods were independent of the laying order. Our results indicate that song quality partially reflects early ontogenetic conditions, whereas song duration and note-type repertoire were independent of either laying order or age hierarchy. The syntactical complexity of note order declined over the laying sequence. This finding suggests that the song learning ability is influenced by within-clutch variation in maternal investment toward eggs. Considering that song syntactical complexity is subject to female preference in the Bengalese finch, it is likely that maternal resource allocation strategies play a role in song evolution." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/93e1af1e422a4bef42d23f9f62030262> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract In long-lived animals, the challenges that threaten individual homeostasis, and the way they are dealt with, are expected to vary in an age-related manner, encompassing the progressive selection of superior phenotypes and the acquisition and improvement of key skills (e.g. foraging, breeding and fighting abilities). Since exposure to homeostatic challenges typically elevates circulating glucocorticoid (GC) levels in vertebrates (modulating the behavioural and physiological responses that mediate allostasis), we may expect concomitant age-related changes in these hormones. Here, we investigated whether the level of corticosterone (the main avian GC) deposited in feathers during regular moult reflected the expected lifelong progression of energetic challenges in a long-lived raptor, the black kite (Milvus migrans). Feather corticosterone values were highest in the youngest birds, gradually declined to reach minimum levels in prime age, 7- to 11-year-old birds, and then increased again slightly among the oldest, senescent birds (≥12 years old). This pattern mirrored the age-related changes in reproductive success and survival rates previously reported for this population, suggesting that feather corticosterone levels captured the most vulnerable and challenging periods experienced by these birds as they proceeded through life. Moreover, feather corticosterone levels were negatively related to body size, suggesting that larger birds either experienced fewer homeostatic challenges, or were better able to cope with them. Feather corticosterone measures thus provided a valuable snapshot of how allostatic loads vary along the life of individuals, supporting the idea of a tight, long-term link between cumulative physiological responses to ecological challenges and demographic performance." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d85414b4fdfcd29a2ceb7c1a084907db> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary We tested Eriksson's (1979) hypothesis that goldeneye and perch compete for invertebrate prey.(1)Diet overlap was high on both prey type (71%) and prey size (80%). Ephemeroptera nymphs and Trichoptera larvae made up over 65% of the stomach contents of goldeneye and perch, and over 80% of the diets of both species were organisms in the 0–20 mm size range.(2)Goldeneye and perch co-occurred on all three study lakes but there was an inverse relationship between their abundances on nine study plots within those lakes. This reciprocal density trend was not due merely to differences in habitat use by perch and goldeneye. When variation in habitat structure was controlled via partial correlation techniques, the reciprocal density trend remained.(3)An alternative hypothesis that density dependent predation maintained habitat separation of perch and goldeneye was not supported.(4)Food resources were limited in at least some sites.(5)Sites which supported populations of both perch and goldeneye had a significantly greater diversity of resources and a tendency toward higher levels of food production than sites in which only one or neither species occurred.(6)We cannot reject Eriksson's (1979) hypothesis. Our results are in agreement with his studies in Sweden and suggest that interactions between goldeneye and Perca spp. may be comparable over large geographic areas." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/fd2a55ca403fab425702ce3414b443b7> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Variations in the amount of solar ultraviolet-B radiation (UV-B) reaching the biosphere may alter productivity in non-agricultural plants. We examined how ambient levels of UV-B modify the biomass of seven temperate-zone species including three grass species (Echinochloa crusgalli, Setaria faberi, Elymus virginicus), three forbs (Verbascum blattaria, Lactuca biennis, Oenothera parviflora), and one tree species (Quercus rubra). Plants were grown outside in enclosures near Morgantown, WV, USA (39° N, 79° W) for one season under near-ambient or no UV-B conditions. The different levels of UV-B were achieved using filters which differentially transmit UV-B irradiance. There was a trend towards reduced above-ground biomass in L. biennis (14%) and significantly increased above-ground biomass in O. parviflora (10.2%) under ambient UV-B. The partitioning of biomass between individual plant parts was altered by ambient UV-B in O. parviflora. Leaf biomass was significantly increased (18%), and there were trends toward increased stem (6.7%) and reproductive (9%) biomass. In addition to biomass stimulations, O. parviflora grew significantly taller (5.3%) under ambient UV-B. This study provides evidence that some non-agricultural plants exhibit species-specific growth responses to variable UV-B, with short-lived forbs appearing to be the most sensitive. If the biomass and morphological alterations observed for the forbs in this study were to persist over several years, they might modify population dynamics, competitive interactions, and productivity in ecosystems as UV-B levels fluctuate in the future." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/23748a524fbba62ceb2dabdf5c7556de> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Spermatozoa of the ostracod superfamily Cypridoidea include some of the longest in the animal kingdom, but unlike other so-called giant spermatozoa, they are aflagellate, probably evolved only once, and represent an exceptionally old trait. Sperm length variations within cypridoidean species remain poorly known, a lack that hinders the development of hypotheses to explain their length and variation. For this study, the lengths of 500 spermatozoa from each of five species of freshwater cypridoidean ostracods, Candonopsis tenuis (Brady, 1886), Fabaeformiscandona subacuta (Yang, 1982), Heterocypris rotundata (Bronshtein, 1928), Ilyocypris japonica Okubo, 1990, and Notodromas trulla Smith and Kamiya, 2014, were measured, including the lengths of the posterior and anterior regions. No overall pattern in sperm variation was discernible. Length variations between species, between males of the same species, and within individual males varied from low (Candonopsis tenuis) to extraordinarily large (Notodromas trulla and Fabaeformiscandona subacuta). Sperm competition, cryptic female choice, sperm heteromorphism, and testis size are unlikely to explain all of the variations observed. Age structures of the populations sampled might play a role in explaining some intraspecific variation. The differing amounts of variation in sperm characters revealed in this study suggest that multiple evolutionary trends and pressures shape sperm lengths in this superfamily." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/bbdba44dc27257176f1c1a458ed6f797> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Many species of planktonic cladocerans display substantial variation in habitat use (mean depth and diel vertical migration), both among and within populations. We examined whether clonal segregation and specialization contributes to such behavioral variation within several lake populations of the cladoceran, Daphnia pulicaria. Electrophoretic and quantitative genetic analysis of clonal lines isolated from different depths at night revealed that clonal habitat specialization was common. Clones that utilized shallow water at night were genetically smaller at maturity and lower fecundity under standard laboratory conditions than the deep-water clones. The magnitude of this clonal habitat specialization varied among lakes: populations displaying broad use of depth habitats contained greater genetic variance than populations with more constrained habitat use. These results are consistent with known differences in selective factors in different depth habitats and suggest that substantial clonal specialization can occur within single populations. Since previous work has discovered a heritable basis to habitat selection in several Daphnia species, including D. pulicaria in our study lakes, it is likely that clonal/depth specialization is an important factor affecting the trophic ecology of Daphnia." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/5c72d78eba62495c8902382bf67967f7> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The distribution and population density of the mole (Talpa europaea L.) and its main food item, earthworms (Lumbricidae) were determined in relation to physical habitat factors in an upland pasture in southeast Scotland. The results showed that the species distribution and the abundance of earthworms were related to the physical habitat. Moles lived in the areas where earthworms were more abundant, and fewer moles were found in the areas with few earthworms. The distribution of moles was not related to the physical habitat. However, because the physical habitat directly limits the abundance of earthworms, it also indirectly influences the abundance of moles." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e7aeaf86e7d2c1db778c1b5c6d6ecc8e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary. Workers of the amblyoponine species Mystrium rogeri employ trail communication during recruitment to food sources and new nest sites. The trail pheromone originates from a hitherto unknown sternal gland located in the 7th abdominal sternite. The recruiting ant deposits the gland secretions by a special gaster-dragging behavior. The recruitment behavior can be complemented by a rapid vertical body shaking performed by some recruiting ants inside the nest. M. rogeri workers possess a large pygidial gland, the secretion of which elicits a repellent response in other ant species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b5e145da44f9ba0f9303138797e373c0> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Myiasis, the infestation of tissues of live humans and other vertebrate animals with dipteran larvae (maggots), is a phenomenon of widespread occurrence throughout the tropical regions of the world. It is commonly seen in domestic and wild animals but occurs rarely in man also. The tissue invasion in man by maggots is generally a well-recognized complication of neglected wounds. The condition may be asymptomatic but occasionally results in more or less severe problems and even death when larvae invade body cavities or areas that forbid their direct visual examination. Many cases of myiasis, however, usually do not reach the attention of medical practitioners because of the tendency of the mature larvae to migrate out of the lesion for pupation. In the present study, the authors reviewed the past literature describing the cases of human myiasis, causative fly species and predisposing factors for the onset of the same. The aim of the present manuscript is to provide a database for the future reference of medical entomologists, medical practitioners and veterinarians. Review of literature revealed that 37 fly species belonging to ten families were responsible worldwide for the onset of human myiasis. The incidence of myiasis among humans can be correlated to increasing fly populations, poor hygienic conditions and presence of domestic animals in the close vicinity. Other factors responsible for myiasis include neglected open wounds and foul-smelling discharge from natural body openings. Moreover, ignorance plays a key role in its occurrence since people are generally unaware about the actual cause and often correlate the condition to their superstitious beliefs. It is emphasized that the patients should not neglect their wounds and should take proper medical care; otherwise, myiasis may supervene." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ac235ee966ec299475646a1dd963a396> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Seasonality of conceptions in human populations in Chile was studied for a period of 30 years (1945–1974). Clear seasonal conception courses exist in the country, exception made of the northern and southern extremes. Seasonal flux is concentrated mainly in January, but also secondary increases in April and June were observed. Along the 30-year period a general pattern of decreasing seasonality is observed. Conception is significantly related to temperature and photoperiod in this country, the maximum rates of conceptions being observed in coincidence with the maximum temperatures and photoperiods. Nonclimatic factors which may be affecting seasonality of conceptions are also discussed." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d107662d3b91e137f51769c5ed179046> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Mechanisms of dry-season drought resistance were evaluated for five evergreen shrubs (Psychotria, Rubiaceae) which occur syntopically in tropical moist forest in central Panama. Rooting depths, leaf conductance, tissue osmotic potentials and elasticity, and the timing of leaf production were evaluated. From wet to dry season, tissue osmotic potentials declined and moduli of elasticity increased in four and five species, respectively. Irrigation only affected osmotic adjustment by P. furcata. The other seasonal changes in leaf tissue properties represented ontogenetic change. Nevertheless, they made an important contribution to dry-season turgor maintenance. Small between-year differences in dry season rainfall had large effects on plant water status. In 1986, 51 mm of rain fell between 1 January and 31 March, and pre-dawn turgor potentials averaged <0.1 MPa for all five Psychotria species in March (Wright 1991). In 1989, 111 mm of rain fell in the same period, pre-dawn turgor potentials averaged from 0.75 to 1.0 MPa for three of the species in April, and only P. chagrensis lost turgor. The relation between leaf production and drought differed among species. P. limonensis was buffered against drought by the lowest dry-season conductances and the deepest roots (averaging 244% deeper than its congeners) and was the only species to produce large numbers of leaves in the dry season. P. chagrensis was most susceptible to drought, and leaf production ceased as turgor loss developed. For the other species, water stress during severe dry seasons may select against dry-season leaf production." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/7da56f06f3495c885f93fefad8d09916> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Synopsis Reproductive success was determined for individual male rock bass, Ambloplites rupestris, inhabiting the Middle Thames River near London, Ontario. Successful males produced numbers of young similar to rock bass breeding elsewhere, but the probability of males producing any young at all was comparatively small. Flooding, predation, and fouling of nests by algae were the major causes of brood mortality. Brood vulnerability was greatest within the egg, when nests were probably most conspicuous to predators. Male reproductive success was positively correlated with large size, early nesting, warm water conditions, and minimal flow rates. Larger males were chosen preferentially by females, and renested more often." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/5f919772b292319998a57d00bb96b017> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Theoretical and empirical models of populations dynamics have paid little attention to the implications of density-dependent individual growth on the persistence and regulation of small freshwater salmonid populations. We have therefore designed a study aimed at testing our hypothesis that density-dependent individual growth is a process that enhances population recovery and reduces extinction risk in salmonid populations in a variable environment subject to disturbance events. This hypothesis was tested in two newly introduced marble trout (Salmo marmoratus) populations living in Slovenian streams (Zakojska and Gorska) subject to severe autumn floods. We developed a discrete-time stochastic individual-based model of population dynamics for each population with demographic parameters and compensatory responses tightly calibrated on data from individually tagged marble trout. The occurrence of severe flood events causing population collapses was explicitly accounted for in the model. We used the model in a population viability analysis setting to estimate the quasi-extinction risk and demographic indexes of the two marble trout populations when individual growth was density-dependent. We ran a set of simulations in which the effect of floods on population abundance was explicitly accounted for and another set of simulations in which flood events were not included in the model. These simulation results were compared with those of scenarios in which individual growth was modelled with density-independent Von Bertalanffy growth curves. Our results show how density-dependent individual growth may confer remarkable resilience to marble trout populations in case of major flood events. The resilience to flood events shown by the simulation results can be explained by the increase in size-dependent fecundity as a consequence of the drop in population size after a severe flood, which allows the population to quickly recover to the pre-event conditions. Our results suggest that density-dependent individual growth plays a potentially powerful role in the persistence of freshwater salmonids living in streams subject to recurrent yet unpredictable flood events." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/5a58dfcff3bb9f217f4061505c9a5594> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Intraspecific genetic variation can have similar effects as species diversity on ecosystem function; understanding such variation is important, particularly for ecological key species. The brown trout plays central roles in many northern freshwater ecosystems, and several cases of sympatric brown trout populations have been detected in freshwater lakes based on apparent morphological differences. In some rare cases, sympatric, genetically distinct populations lacking visible phenotypic differences have been detected based on genetic data alone. Detecting such “cryptic” sympatric populations without prior grouping of individuals based on phenotypic characteristics is more difficult statistically, though. The aim of the present study is to delineate the spatial connectivity of two cryptic, sympatric genetic clusters of brown trout discovered in two interconnected, tiny subarctic Swedish lakes. The structures were detected using allozyme markers, and have been monitored over time. Here, we confirm their existence for almost three decades and report that these cryptic, sympatric populations exhibit very different connectivity patterns to brown trout of nearby lakes. One of the clusters is relatively isolated while the other one shows high genetic similarity to downstream populations. There are indications of different spawning sites as reflected in genetic structuring among parr from different creeks. We used >3000 SNPs on a subsample and find that the SNPs largely confirm the allozyme pattern but give considerably lower F ST values, and potentially indicate further structuring within populations. This type of complex genetic substructuring over microgeographical scales might be more common than anticipated and needs to be considered in conservation management." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/13aeaa27cb802acaf46077fd83070a49> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Interactions between predators and prey organisms are of fundamental importance to ecological communities. While the ecological impact that grazing predators can have in terrestrial and temperate marine systems are well established, the importance of coral grazers on tropical reefs has rarely been considered. In this study, we estimate the biomass of coral tissue consumed by four prominent species of corallivorous butterflyfishes. Sub-adult butterflyfishes (60–70 mm, 6–11 g) remove between 0.6 and 0.9 g of live coral tissue per day, while larger adults (>110 mm, ~40–50 g) remove between 1.5 and 3 g of coral tissue each day. These individual consumption rates correspond to the population of coral-feeding butterflyfishes at three exposed reef crest habitats at Lizard Island, Great Barrier Reef, consuming between 14.6 g (±2.0) and 19.6 g (±3.9) .200 m−2 day−1 of coral tissue. When standardised to the biomass of butterflyfishes present, a combined reefwide removal rate of 4.2 g (±1.2) of coral tissue is consumed per 200 m−2 kg−1 of coral-feeding butterflyfishes. The quantity of coral tissue removed by these predators is considerably larger than previously expected and indicates that coral grazers are likely to play an important role in the transfer of energy fixed by corals to higher consumers. Chronic coral consumption by butterflyfishes is expected to exact a large energetic cost upon prey corals and contribute to an increased rate of coral loss on reefs already threatened by anthropogenic pressure and ongoing climate change." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/451133b84cf0484b5383975c1d043b49> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary (1)The diet of the three-spined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus L.) feeding on a range of denstities of waterfleas (Daphnia magna Strauss) and mayfly larvae (Cloëon dipterum L.) was studied in laboratory experiments.(2)Sticklebacks almost invariably caught Daphnia at the first attempt but the success rate at catching Cloëon larvae decreased when the total prey density increased.(3)The relative abundance of the prey is a better predictor of the diet composition of the stickleback than the absolute density of either prey type.(4) Daphnia were always preferred above Cloëon but this preference was not constant over the range of prey density combinations studied. The preference was found to change according to two principles: (i) preference for the preferred prey, Daphnia, increases when the total prey density increases; (ii) preference for the relatively scarce prey increases when the total prey density increases.(5)The results are discussed in the light of optimal foraging theory, whereby the predators' disproportionate concentration on the relatively scarce prey-type (counter-switching), when the total prey density is high, is related to possible changes in the profitability of the prey types." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2862cb78448e2cde5e077dbe2ceafffa> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Invasive plants can reduce plant diversity and abundance in native grassland communities; however, the effect on the native seed bank is less clear. The objective of this study was to assess the effects of invasion by the exotic grass old world bluestem (OWB; Bothriochloa spp.) on native aboveground plant species composition and seed bank diversity and abundance (i.e., cover, density). In this central Great Plains grassland, OWB invasion had differential effects on native diversity and abundance of both aboveground and seed bank plant communities. Native plant species diversity and cover showed a steep decline as OWB cover increased. No change in native seed density or richness was observed in response to OWB invasion, however, OWB seed density increased with increasing invasion, thus increasing total seed density. Our results indicate that as OWB invasion increases, the native plant community decreases in diversity and abundance. Although, no effect on native seed bank diversity and density was observed in this study, as native seeds are lost through a loss of native species in the plant communities, native seed bank diversity and density is expected to decline." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/7aacf39e9a275409088bbf72f3663ac3> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract We studied organic components in the X106 sediment core (length 130.3 cm, water depth 236 m, 50°53′01″N, 100°21′22″E) from Lake Hovsgol to elucidate the biological production, source of organic components, and paleoenvironmental and paleolimnological changes during the last 27 kyr in northwest Mongolia. Total organic carbon (TOC) contents (0.20–0.70%) in the core of the last glacial period increased dramatically and attained 3.16–5.85% in the postglacial period (Holocene), together with the increase of the contribution of terrestrial organic matter. Biological production (both terrestrial and aquatic production) based on the TOC contents in the Holocene was 14 times higher than that in the last glacial period. The Bølling-Allerød warm period and Younger Dryas cool period were both observed at depths of 55–50 cm (ca. 15–13 cal kyr BP) and 50–45 cm (ca. 13–11 cal kyr BP), respectively. We propose here a terrestrial/aquatic index (TAI) for organic matter in lake sediments. The TAI values suggest that terrestrial organic matter in the bottom of the core was less than 10%, increased to 48% in the Bølling-Allerød warm period, decreased abruptly to 20% in the Younger Dryas cool period, and again increased to 30–40% in the Holocene. Normal-C31 alkane (a biomarker of herbaceous land plants) and n-C18 alkanoic acid (marker of plankton) decreased from the last glacial period to the Holocene, whereas n-C23 alkane and n-C22 alkanoic acid (a marker of higher vascular plants) increased from the last glacial period to the Holocene. Scarce herbaceous plant vegetation, such as Artemisia spp. of the lake basin in the last glacial period, changed into an abundance of higher woody plant vegetation (e.g., Pinus spp., Betula spp. and/or Larix spp.) in the Holocene. Stanol/sterol ratios suggest that relatively high oxygen tension of the lake bottom in ca. 27–22 cal kyr BP decreased from this age to the present, though benthic organisms are still abundant." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/79b86a16c030056e53212b846cec8c75> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The Aleppo pine (Pinus halepensis Mill.) is found in the Mediterranean under a broad range of moisture and thermal conditions. Differences in severity and duration of water stress among native habitats may act as selective forces shaping the populations’ genetic make-up in terms of contrasting drought strategies. We hypothesised that these strategies should translate into intraspecific variation in carbon isotope composition (δ13C, surrogate of intrinsic water-use efficiency, WUEi) of wood holocellulose, and such variation might be linked to changes in oxygen isotope composition (δ18O, proxy of stomatal conductance) and to some climatic features at origin. Thus, we evaluated δ13C, δ18O, growth and survival for 25 Aleppo pine populations covering its geographic range and grown in two common-garden tests. We found intraspecific variability for δ13C and growth, with high-WUEi populations (which showed 18O-enriched holocellulose) having low growth. These results suggest stomatal regulation as common control for δ13C and productivity. We also detected sizeable relationships between δ13C and climate factors related to the magnitude and timing of drought such as the ratio of summer to annual rainfall. The main climate variable associated with δ18O was minimum temperature, but only in the coldest trial, suggesting differences in growth rhythms among sources. Overall, slow growing populations from highly-seasonal dry areas of the western Mediterranean exhibited a conservative water-use, as opposed to fast growing sources from the northernmost distribution range. The particular behaviour of the Mediterranean Aleppo pine as compared with other conifers demonstrates different selective roles of climate variables in determining intraspecific fitness." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a9923e46eb4371b1e4a4dddee8a1f014> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary In interspecific competition studies, some cases of apparent change in competitive ability have been reported. But the change in competitive outcome could equally well be due to character displacement. As a preliminary to studies of the effects of association of D. melanogaster (yellow white mutant strain) and D. simulans (vermilion mutant strain), the nature and extent of ecological differences between them, and the nature of their competitive interaction was studied. Differences between the strains were shown for oviposition site preferences, and for larval and pupal distribution. In pure species cultures, simulans showed a greater preference than melanogaster for oviposition in the center of the medium surface. In mixed populations, simulans had an increased preference for this oviposition site, where melanogaster was at low frequency. D. simulans larvae utilized the lower half of the medium to a significantly greater extent than did melanogaster. At low density (5 pairs of parents) in pure species cultures, 68.7% of simulans pupae were on the medium surface. As parental numbers increased, this proportion decreased. The distribution of melanogaster pupae was quite different, with only 8 to 12% on the medium at all densities. But the remaining pupae tended to occur higher on the cylinder wall as parental numbers increased. The competitive interaction changed during the developmental period. At four and eight days after culture initiation, simulans appeared superior, while for total adult progeny production, melanogaster was slightly superior. These strans of the two species were not ecologically equivalent." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/936e2ec399308761c9d4162bab1a0cf8> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Prevention efforts to combat pine wilt disease must be instituted to avoid destruction of coastal forests in Hokkaido, northern Japan. We examine an alternative method involving the conversion of Pinus thunbergii forests to native broadleaf species through advancing their growth, but we have little knowledge about the response of advanced growth to overhead canopy release. To demonstrate the demographic and height growth response of advanced growth to the light change in a coastal Pinus thunbergii forest, canopy trees were removed and the sapling populations were monitored for 6 years. Inhibition in height growth caused by light increase was observed in Cerasus sargentii and Kalopanax septemlobus saplings. Especially in Kalopanax septemlobus, a remarkable decline was observed in the saplings growing in the darker positions which experienced light change. Therefore, large light changes should be carefully avoided for this species especially in the darker positions. In contrast, relative height growth rates of Quercus crispula and, especially, Quercus dentata increased with increasing light, and saplings tended to die in the darker positions. No dead trees of Sorbus commixta were observed during the study period. The saplings also showed good height growth even when under closed canopy. This species seems to be adaptive to a dark environment. Since Quercus dentata and Kalopanax septemlobus are the major components of the natural coastal forests in Hokkaido, gradual canopy release is available to foster advanced growth in coastal Pinus thunbergii forest, in accordance with the concept of density control in coastal forests." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/58b8b4a15581dd709a32cf3088b8f92d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Strong solar irradiation in combination with still air and dry soil can cause prostrate high-mountain plants to heat up considerably and ultimately suffer heat damage. Such heat damage has been repeatedly shown for vegetative structures, but not for reproductive structures, which we expected to be particularly vulnerable to heat. Heat effects on cold-adapted plants may increase with rising global temperatures and the predicted increase in heat waves. We have tested the heat tolerance of reproductive versus vegetative shoots at different reproductive stages, comparing ten common plant species from different elevation belts in the European Alps. Plant samples were exposed to temperatures in 2-K steps of 30 min each between 42 and 56 °C. Heat damage was assessed by visual rating and vital staining. Reproductive shoots were on average 2.5 K less heat tolerant (LT50, i.e. the mean temperature causing 50 % heat damage, 47.2 °C) than vegetative shoots (mean LT50 49.7 °C). Initial heat injuries (mean LT10) were observed at 43–45 °C in heat-susceptible species and at 45–47 °C in more heat-tolerant species, in at least one reproductive stage. Generally, heat tolerance was significantly higher during fruiting than during the bud stages and anthesis. Prostrate species with acaulescent buds and flowers tolerated heat better than those with caulescent buds and flowers. Petals were the most heat-susceptible plant structure and mature pollen the most heat tolerant. Based on these data, heat tolerance of reproductive structures appears to be adapted to the prevailing maximum temperatures which the plants experience during different reproductive stages in their environment. During hot spells, however, heat tolerance thresholds may be exceeded. More frequent heat waves would decrease the reproductive output and, consequently, the competitiveness of heat-susceptible species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/c40e4fad0ba87f6df32431e7d7aa326d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Although many studies have been conducted on the ecological functions and ecophysiological characteristics of lichen soil crusts (LSCs), no explanation of these results has been provided based on crust structures. Using algae soil crusts (ASCs) as comparison, this work studied the small-scale vertical distribution of algal biomass and stratification in two types of LSCs, by combining the binocular stereomicroscope observations, microscope observations, plate cultures, chlorophyll analysis, and polysaccharides analysis. The results showed an obvious difference in the proportion but not the composition of the algae species between the ASCs and the two LSCs. Approximately 60% and 80% of the total algal biomass were concentrated in the top 1 mm of the soil profile and thalli in the ASCs and LSCs, respectively. This implies that symbiotic algae are the dominant species and primary organic carbon producers in LSCs, and the algal biomass decreased with the depth in both the ASCs and LSCs. The small-scale vertical distributions of the crustal algal biomass and polysaccharides were characterized by obvious successional stage, whereas these were unrelated to the crust type within the successional stage. Additionally, a large amount of fungi, which were always piercing the entire crusts, were observed in the LSCs, but only occasionally in the ASCs. These special structures are purported to cause the LSCs to achieve specific ecological functions, such as higher carbon fixation and greater compressive strength. High biomass, large living space, and advantageous resource utilization privilege suggest that the lichen association is mutualistic and the direction from ASCs to LSCs is developmental." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4fb8a6cb0725094ac19a4567fb90647a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Pimelea spinescens is a critically endangered species of the temperate grasslands of southeastern Australia. Two subspecies are recognised. Subspecies, P. spinescens subsp. spinescens, formerly common and widespread, is found in isolated remnants of previously extensive grasslands. The second subspecies, subsp. pubiflora, is thought to have been historically rare with only two geographically-isolated extant populations. The grassland communities exist now as fragmented remnants representing <1 % of their extent prior to European settlement in the early 1800s. Conservation management strategies for species in these critically endangered ecosystems rely on an understanding of genetic diversity and population structure to ensure long-term evolutionary potential. We used chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) and microsatellite markers to examine the population genetic structure of both subspecies. Analysis of cpDNA revealed 14 haplotypes with high divergence between the single haplotype found in subsp. pubiflora and most remaining haplotypes restricted to subsp. spinescens. Microsatellites also indicated high genetic differentiation between subspecies but little evidence of sub-structuring within either subspecies. Results suggest that seed dispersal has not been as limited as previously thought. In this fragmented habitat, a lack of genetic structure suggests buffers to genetic erosion, with current patterns reflecting genetic diversity prior to fragmentation. Plant longevity and the presence of seed banks may contribute to the maintenance of these patterns, resulting in a lag between fragmentation and genetic erosion. Whilst factors such as longevity and seed banks may be preserving historic genetic diversity, management is required to ensure the maintenance of this diversity into the future." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e4ca6b3b5c888612d3c338ae88933206> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Observations on pre-emergence, single-foundress colonies of Japanese paper wasps (Polistes) revealed that there was a latitudinal gradient in intensity of application of an ant-repellent substance (secreted by the metasomal sternum VI glands) to the nest petiole. Thus the lower the latitude, the more frequently a foundress rubbed ant repellent onto the nest petiole. Estimation of potential ant predation on wasp brood using bait traps showed that there was a positive correlation between the frequency of rubbing and potential predation pressure from ants which are guided predominantly by substrate cues for foraging. There was also a latitudinal gradient in the degree of temporal association of rubbing behavior with foraging: the lower the latitude, the more closely foundress departure from the nest was associated with rubbing. Enlargement of the nest petiole by applying oral secretion potentially obliterated previous coats of ant repellent; however, this behavior was not always followed by rubbing behavior. The ant-repellent chemical barrier around the nest petiole may have evolved in tropical regions of the world as a defense against ant predation on wasp brood. I argue that as ant predation pressure diminishes towards the cooler regions, so does selection maintaining the behavioral sequence where foundress departure from the nest is preceded by rubbing behavior." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b386ba01d7e6177fc56e12cac80dac69> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The review focuses on the use of primary producers as a biological tool for evaluating the impact of damage by human activity (eutrophication, toxicity) on the aquatic environment. Studies are discussed following a reductionist approach by using algal bioassays (Selenastrum capricornutum). Variations of algal growth potential (AGP) within watersheds show the impact of human activities such as agriculture and urbanization, on water quality. The study of variation of the AGP in time allowed the investigation of the effect of abiotic (temperature, flow rate) and biotic factors (indigenous primary production) on the concentration of nutrients potentially available to phytoplankton. Seasonal changes of the AGP have further shown the impact of non-point (runoff) or point sources (sewage effluents) on the aquatic system. A staggered relationship was observed between AGP values and chlorophyll a content of indigenous phytoplankton. Values obtained in the laboratory by means of this type of approach would therefore appear to be transferably to natural systems. S. capricornutum was also used to identify toxic characteristics of substances (in pure form or used in formulations) and effluents released into the environment. It was shown that the user of bioassays should use care when evaluating results from tests requiring pretreatment such as storage, autoclaving and filtration. Cautious interpretation is also recommended in order to distinguish between effects of growth-limiting essential elements and the presence of toxic substances. In general it appears from this review that the AGP provides helpful information for a sound management of the aquatic environment." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9111c5b5e2b1b8623fc2342bb1eb4a0e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Activity traps are commonly used to develop abundance indices of aquatic invertebrates and may be deployed with either the funnel parallel to the water surface (horizontal position) or facing down (vertical position). We compared the relative performance of these two positions in terms of numbers of invertebrates captured, species richness of samples, detection rates of specific taxa, and community-level characterizations. Estimates of zooplankton abundance were also compared to quantitative estimates obtained using a watercolumn sampler. We used a matched-pairs design where 10 pairs of traps (one horizontal, one vertical) were deployed in each of 4 prairie wetlands on 5 dates in 1999. Vertical traps had higher detection rates and captured greater numbers of adult and larval Coleoptera, Hemiptera, Chaoboridae, hydracarina, cladocera, and Copepoda and also produced samples with greater species richness. Horizontal traps captured greater numbers of Amphipoda and Ostracoda and had higher detection rates for these taxa. Estimates of zooplankton abundance with vertical traps also correlated better with quantitative estimates and indicated greater differences between wetlands than horizontal traps. Both traps showed similar relationships among wetlands and changes through time at the community level, but vertical traps were more sensitive to temporal change. Our results indicate that vertical traps outperform horizontal traps and are preferable for obtaining indices of invertebrate abundance." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d72451a20c3984d096c1e5902c38bd8e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary An energy budget was constructed for the marine nematode Monhystera disjuncta. Respiration was measured with a modified Cartesian diver technique, in which the nematodes were kept in agar inside the diver ‘head’. The relationship between respiration and body weight was: R =1.53 W0.75. Body growth was exponential during the juvenile phase, with a growth rate equal to 0.61 d-1. After maturation the growth rate fell to 0.17 d-1. Food uptake was measured in experiments with radiolabeled bacteria. In one series of experiments the accumulation of radiolabel in the nematodes was followed. In a second series the decrease in labeling was followed when pre-labeled nematodes fed on unlabeled bacteria. A model for label uptake permitted the calculation of assimilation efficiency and consumption rates. Consumption rates thus measured, correspond well to those calculated from the growth, reproduction and respiration rates. Assimilation efficiency was low, around 25%. Production efficiency (P/(P+R)) was high: 60% for the population at stable age distribution, and up to 75% for reproducing females. This seems to be a general feature in nematodes." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/95f13222890c67d9b3033896ab666f3e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract (Micro)Plastics in the aquatic environment are an issue of emerging concern. However, to date, there is considerable lack of knowledge on the abundance and toxicity of plastic debris in aquatic ecosystems, especially with regard to the freshwater situation. In this editorial, we briefly discuss important aspects of the research on environmental (micro)plastics to stimulate research and call for papers." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/052392864171b1e6707a385554ce9c15> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract A new myxosporean, Zschokkella egyptica n. sp. was found in the gallbladder of two hosts: the eel catfish Plotosus lineatus and the freckled goat fish Upeneus tragula from the Red Sea at Suez City, Egypt. The plasmodia were polysporic, kidney to elliptical shaped with hairy holdfast projection and measured 109 × 70 μm. Mature spores were fusiform with 9 to 11 longitudinal striations. The mean spore dimensions were 13.0 × 10.5 μm. Spherical polar capsules are 4.8 μm in diameter; the polar filament showed four turns and were arranged perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the capsule." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8ee5eed92657bd8ebcc835f6bff89847> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract. In this study, a whole-lake carbon budget for the oligotrophic, clearwater Lake Eckarfjärden was established both on an annual and seasonal basis. For budget calculations, the lake was divided into three habitats (pelagial, littoral and benthic) and the biota into 19 functional groups. In the lake, major parts of biomass (97%) and primary production (91%) are concentrated in benthic and littoral habitats and to a few functional groups. Respiration on the other hand, is focused on benthic and pelagial habitats where 60% and 39%, respectively, of the respiration took place. Our conceptual model indicates strong interactions between habitats. For instance, the pelagial is fed with carbon fixed by primary producers in the benthic and littoral zones. On an annual basis, total primary production exceeds total respiration and the lake is net autotrophic. However, there are clear differences between habitats and between seasons. For instance, the littoral is net autotrophic during spring, summer and autumn, the benthic habitat is net autotrophic only during summer, and the pelagial is always net heterotrophic. Our results demonstrate clear couplings between habitats and organisms and the importance of a holistic view when studying lake ecosystems." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9d8cc0dee3b96f591ff5edff9c8cc14b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary This study examined the long term effects of predation by larvae of the midge Chaoborus and simulated fish predation on experimental Daphnia longispina populations. Chaoborus predation, relative to fish predation, led to populations composed of larger individuals as a whole, larger egg-bearing individuals, and a larger primiparous instar. Daphnia retained helmets beyond the first instar in response to the presence of Chaoborus. Both types of predation, relative to predator-free controls, reduced prey population size and rates of increase, but increased population death rates. The reduction in population size due to predation led to increased resource availability for individuals remaining in the populations and increased individual fecundity in the predation treatments. The differences noted between the Chaoborus, fish, and control treatments increased with predation intensity." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/437fa637de854dcdadd9b2b13a098808> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Five northern fulmars (Fulmarus glacialis) were tracked by satellite transmitters from their breeding colony in the Canadian high Arctic (Cape Vera, Devon Island, NT) to their wintering grounds in the northwest Atlantic Ocean. In both 2004 and 2005, fulmars left northern Baffin Bay in mid- to late September, and migrated south to Davis Strait in less than 1 week, after which movements were erratic. In October and November, the birds were widely distributed, but by December through March, they tended to remain in the Labrador Sea between 50 and 55°N. Average flight speed was 35 km/h with a maximum of 64 km/h, and over their entire transmission periods, the five traveled on average 84 km/day. Our work suggests that the North Atlantic northern fulmar population may be panmictic in winter, with the Labrador Sea as a key wintering site for fulmars from high Arctic Canada." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9bb177b7748eaba1d8de2928cb894fd2> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Northern elephant seals (Mirounga angustirostris Gill, 1866), inhabiting rookeries on the mainland of Año Nuevo State Reserve in central California, were investigated in 2012 for presence of hookworms (Uncinaria spp.). Material collected and examined for hookworms included: blubber (n = 15), stomach and intestines (n = 21) from dead pups; feces from the rectum of weaned pups (n = 23); sand containing apparent feces in areas of weaned pups (n = 28) and sand without apparent feces in areas of weaned pups (n = 54); milk from females (n =23) at 5 days and about 23 to 26 days postpartum; and placenta from one female. Evidence of hookworm presence was not detected in any of the samples examined. Possible reasons why hookworms were not found in northern elephant seals on the mainland of Año Nuevo State Reserve are discussed." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8e7d8c14da4532782a876be6c42fb0a3> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Sound-speed and density contrasts (h and g, respectively), important acoustic material properties, of Japanese sandeel Ammodytes personatus were measured to estimate theoretical target strength (TS). The measured sound-speed contrast of adult fish varied between 1.016 and 1.023 (mean 1.020), and showed temperature dependence. The measured density contrast differed significantly between juvenile and adult. The density contrast of juvenile varied between 1.017 and 1.024 (1.021), and that of adult varied between 1.026 and 1.038 (1.032). Using these results, TS at 38 and 120 kHz in the fishing season were estimated by an empirical sound scattering model. TS of an individual fish varied significantly with change of tilt angle. TS of near-dorsal aspect (TSmax) and tilt-averaged TS (TSave) differed by up to 7 dB. At both frequencies, two different TSave−length relationships (TSave = a log L + b) were obtained for adult and juvenile. The coefficients of log L of adult were close to 20, suggesting that backscattering strength was proportional to square of body length. These values were larger in juvenile (34.0 at 120 kHz, 56.5 at 38 kHz), suggesting that backscattering strength varied drastically with the cube or fifth power of body length." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/dc495250b33d1c5a324e962353aa304f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Shrimp trawling is common throughout the southeastern and Gulf of Mexico coasts of the USA and is the primary contributor to fisheries discards in these regions. Tens of thousands of nearshore seabirds nest near shrimp trawling grounds in the USA, but to date, there has been no assessment of the relationship between seabirds and shrimp trawlers. We examined the taxonomic composition of bycatch, rate at which seabirds scavenged bycatch, and energy density of discarded bycatch in a nearshore commercial shrimp fishery. Bycatch was primarily comprised of demersal fish that are not typically accessible to the plunge-diving and surface-feeding seabirds that occur in the area. Hence, seabird diets in the region appear to be broadened taxonomically by the availability of discards. Results from discard experiments indicated that 70% of the nearly 5,500 items discarded by hand were scavenged by seabirds and that the fate of a discarded item was most strongly predicted by its taxonomic order. Laughing gulls scavenged the greatest proportion of discards, although brown pelicans were the only species to scavenge more discards than predicted based upon their abundance. Because this is the first such study in the region, it is difficult to ascertain the extent or intensity of the impact that discards have on nearshore seabirds. Nonetheless, our results suggest that it will be difficult for managers to clearly understand fluctuations in local seabird population dynamics without first understanding the extent to which these species rely upon discards. This may be especially problematic in situations where seabird populations are recovering following natural or anthropogenic stressors." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/6d785bca8989e4038fc77522b66c597b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract We analysed the soil nematode community within three different montados (agricultural, pastoral and forestry uses), focusing on temporal variation. Nematodes were classified into trophic groups (bacterivores, fungivores, omnivores, predators and plant-parasitic nematodes (PPN)) and we calculated the maturity index for free-living taxa (MI), maturity index for plant-parasitic taxa (PPI) and the nematode channel ratio (NCR). Temporal variations were most evident during winter when there was a rise in the abundance of the five functional groups. Concordantly, there was a simultaneous increase of soil moisture and organic matter, due to litter decomposition. Fungivore abundance was highest in the forest and the temporal occurrence and abundance of many PPN genera was largely determined by land use. Land management was responsible for differences in plant community structure and composition, thus plant diversity increased from the agricultural to the forestry use. Because the montado shows great temporal variability in vegetation structure our results of MI, PPI and PPI/MI ratio explain the significant changes in the nutritional status over time, with the highest values recorded in the spring. NCR is a good indicator of energy efficiency in the soil decomposition process. Its lowest values were attained in the forest, where the slow-growing plant species favoured a lower activity of the bacterial energy channel and a prevalence of the fungal-based decomposition energy channel. Nematode composition reflected plant succession, changes in decomposition in the soil food web and temporal variations in the structure of soil." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d2f2db20c6fc23d914da93ccb886a789> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Many factors associated with forests are collectively responsible for controlling ectomycorrhizal (ECM) fungal community structure, including plant species composition, forest structure, stand age, and soil nutrients. The objective of this study was to examine relationships among ECM fungal community measures, local soil nutrients, and stand age along a chronosequence of mixed forest stands that were similar in vegetation composition and site quality. Six combinations of age class (5-, 26-, 65-, and 100-year-old) and stand initiation type (wildfire and clearcut) were replicated on four sites, each representing critical seral stages of stand development in Interior Cedar-Hemlock (ICH) forests of southern British Columbia. We found significant relationships between ECM fungal diversity and both available and organic P; available P was also positively correlated with the abundance of two ECM taxa (Rhizopogon vinicolor group and Cenoccocum geophilum). By contrast, ECM fungal diversity varied unpredictably with total and mineralizable N or C to N ratio. We also found that soil C, N, available P, and forest floor depth did not exhibit strong patterns across stand ages. Overall, ECM fungal community structure was more strongly influenced by stand age than specific soil nutrients, but better correlations with soil nutrients may occur at broader spatial scales covering a wider range of site qualities." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a6c0870a4bebe7b108d91ac2ea67e9cd> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The contribution of prey-capture speed to toads' ability to ingest chemically protected prey is evaluated: first, by measuring the speed of toads ingesting palatable prey for comparison with reaction times for prey defenses, and second, by analyzing encounters between toads and bombardier beetles — insects with a quick and potent chemical defense.1.a.Analysis of filmed (64 fps) prey-capture sequences reveals that the rapid tongue flip is preceded by a slower forward lunge of the entire body and followed by a still slower ingestion of retrieved prey (Fig. 1, Table 1). Only the tongue flip, which establishes contact with the prey and retrieves it into the toad's mouth, requires less time than latencies typically reported for invertebrate defensive responses. Ingestion of retrieved prey is not completed until more than 500 ms after initial contact between tongue and prey, giving prey sufficient time to respond with chemical defenses.1.b.Marine toads, the larger of the two species studied, are slower than American toads in all phases of prey-capture up until the beginning of swallowing; however, they complete ingestion as quickly as American toads (Fig. 1, Table 1).2.American toads which attack bombardier beetles usually reject the beetles after retrieving them into their mouths (Table 2). Rejection is a dramatic reversal of prey-capture which typically begins within 300 ms of initial contact between tongue and beetle (Figs. 1, 2). After rejecting a bombardier beetle, American toads exhibit behavior that suggests discomfort and display a temporary aversion to striking again at the beetle (Table 3).3.Marine toads which attack bombardier beetles usually ingest the beetles without showing discomfort (Table 2). When they do reject bombardier beetles or show other behavioral reactions, the behavior is similar to but less intense than that of American toads. Irrespective of the outcome of a previous encounter, marine toads strike willingly when a second bombardier beetle is offered (Table 3).4.An ingested bombardier beetle occasionally causes a toad discomfort but rarely induces the toad to evert its stomach and reject the beetle.5.It is concluded that bombardier beetles attacked by a toad must deploy their chemical defense while still in the toad's mouth if they are to survive. When adequately stimulated, the beetles are able to respond in less time than toads require to ingest prey. Nevertheless, toads can overcome this chemical defense by retrieving and swallowing beetles without eliciting defensive discharges." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9dad836c511233bd06d4869e31e580a5> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract A case study was conducted on the potential impacts of climate change on fish habitat in a southeastern reservoir. A reservoir water quality model and one year of baseline meteorologic, hydrologic, and inflow water quality input were used to simulate current reservoir water quality. Total adult striped bass habitat, defined by specific quantitative temperature and dissolved oxygen criteria, was simulated. Daily reservoir volumes with optimal, suboptimal, and unsuitable temperature and DO were predicted for the year. Output from recent runs of atmospheric general circulation models (GCMs), in which atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations have been doubled, was then used to adjust the baseline inputs to the water quality model. New sets of input data were created for two grid cells for each of three GCMs. All six climate scenarios are predicted to cause overall declines in the available summer striped bass habitat, mostly due to lake water temperatures exceeding striped bass tolerance levels. These predictions are believed to result from the consensus among GCM scenarios that air temperatures and humidity will rise, and the sensitivity of the reservoir model to these parameters. The reservoir model was found to be a promising tool for examining potential climate-change impacts. Some of the assumptions required to apply GCM output to the reservoir model, however, illustrate the problems in using large-scale gridcell output to assess small-scale impacts." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/47b4d7c2c805acbdbc4186f661b22d62> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract We examined whether seston food quality was a significant factor to predict zooplankton, specifically Daphnia pulex, biomass dynamics in Lake Berryessa, California, U.S.A. The seston composition changed dramatically during the study period. Total macrozooplankton to seston biomass ratios were high during the springtime, as was D. pulex biomass. In monthly growth experiments using natural seston, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) concentration was best in explaining D. pulex growth, although α-linolenic acid (ALA) also showed considerable relationship with D. pulex growth. We built D. pulex growth models using combinations of EPA concentration, C:P ratio, and water temperature. The model using EPA concentration, C:P ratio and water temperature was best in explaining D. pulex biomass in springtime in Lake Berryessa. However, this model did not work for other seasons, suggesting that resource control via seston food quality was prevalent in springtime, but other factors may also become important in other seasons in this reservoir." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/09836328460ad6d01b7741cd13beccd6> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The effects of cottonseed meal (CSM) supplementation on forage dry matter intake (FDMI), forage dry matter digestibility (FDMD) and average daily gain (ADG) of steers on pasture in the semi-arid zone of northern Cameroon were evaluated during 120 d in the dry season and the residual effects during 120 d in the rainy season. Thirty steers (229 kg and 2·6 years) were randomly assigned to a complete block design of 3 treatments (0, 0·5 and 1·0 kg of CSM as a protein supplement per steer per day). After feeding CSM to individual steers in the mornings, all were allowed to free graze a pasture ofAndropogon spp. Every month, 2 steers per treatment were put into digestion crates andad lib fed hand-clipped forage of similar botanical composition as that grazed by the remaining steers. Cottonseed meal supplementation increased crude protein absorbed (CPA), rumen turn over rate (RTO) and ADG. Forage intake was increased only with 0·5 kg CSM. Forage dry matter and cell wall (NDF and ADF) digestibility tended to be decreased with 1·0 kg of CSM compared with 0·5 kg or no supplement. Cottonseed meal supplementation during the dry season increased FDMI and RTO, but had no effect on cell wall digestibility, FDMD, CPA and ADG during the rainy season. Data from this study suggest that 0·5 kg of CSM can increase FDMI, RTO, and ADG of cattle during the dry season and that improvement can be maintained throughout the subsequent rainy season." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b242d7825e07e810f4146e92b83deb9f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Termites are a highly uncertain component in the global source budgets of CH4 and CO2. Large seasonal variations in termite mound fluxes of CH4 and CO2 have been reported in tropical savannas but the reason for this is largely unknown. This paper investigated the processes that govern these seasonal variations in CH4 and CO2 fluxes from the mounds of Microcerotermes nervosus Hill (Termitidae), a common termite species in Australian tropical savannas. Fluxes of CH4 and CO2 of termite mounds were 3.5-fold greater in the wet season as compared to the dry season and were a direct function of termite biomass. Termite biomass in mound samples was tenfold greater in the wet season compared to the dry season. When expressed per unit termite biomass, termite fluxes were only 1.2 (CH4) and 1.4 (CO2)-fold greater in the wet season as compared to the dry season and could not explain the large seasonal variations in mound fluxes of CH4 and CO2. Seasonal variation in both gas diffusivity through mound walls and CH4 oxidation by mound material was negligible. These results highlight for the first time that seasonal termite population dynamics are the main driver for the observed seasonal differences in mound fluxes of CH4 and CO2. These findings highlight the need to combine measurements of gas fluxes from termite mounds with detailed studies of termite population dynamics to reduce the uncertainty in quantifying seasonal variations in termite mound fluxes of CH4 and CO2." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/93a898f485d941ac81a69c8aaca45a29> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The objectives of this study were to determine the tolerance of various life stages of zebra mussels to salinity; determine the extent to which acclimation events in estuarine systems, affect tolerance of zebra mussels; and determine the effects of salinity on health or condition of adult zebra mussels. At high temperatures (18–20°C), the condition of zebra mussels is reduced at salinities above 1%.. However, at lower temperatures (3–12°C), the optimum salinity for zebra mussels is 2–4%.. The incipient lethal salinity of post-veligers is near 2%., of larger adults (5–15 mm) between 2%. and 4%., and of veliger larvae near 4.5%.. Zebra mussels are able to acclimate to slowly changing salinities (i.e., 1%. d−1) such that the time to 50% mortality of a population should be greater than 1 yr at temperatures near 20°C and salinites up to 8%." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/412c4324a6ed510557e76ce5f4509a89> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The Lebanese mountain range is an important zone of plant species richness and endemism where the genus Astragalus constitutes a principal component of plant biodiversity. Most of endemic Astragalus taxa, living in mountains and arid zones of Mounts Lebanon and anti-Lebanon, are characterized by a cushion, spiny vegetative form, named “tragacanthic”, which is a remarkable example of vegetative convergence evolution. Because of determination difficulties, taxonomic uncertainties, and discrepancy in the number of taxa listed according to authors, new data are hardly needed to improve systematics of Astragalus and to investigate the role of the Lebanese mountain range as refugia of biodiversity. Before this study only two values on the genome size of Astragalus were reported in the literature and no previous molecular studies had been carried out on Astragalus genus in Lebanon. We examined the utility of rDNA ITS molecular markers to distinguish Astragalus species of Lebanese mountain range and the variation range of their genome size. The main results revealed a striking diversity in Lebanese Astragalus species with the emphasis of a huge variation of genome sizes, an important inter-specific chromosome polymorphism and the existence of a high phylogenetic diversity. The strict endemic species of the Lebanese mountains are positioned throughout the phylogeny. These results confirm that the Lebanon and anti-Lebanon mounts constitute a third diversity center for Astragalus and that high altitude areas are important refugia of plant biodiversity despite centuries of exploitation by humans." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/26181f75618e2e96e6c6694d47e28cd2> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Sympatric species that initially overlap in resource use are expected to partition the environment in ways that will minimize interspecific competition. This shift in resource use can in turn prompt evolutionary changes in morphology. A classic example of habitat partitioning and morphological differentiation are the Caribbean Anolis lizards. Less well studied, but nevertheless striking analogues to the Anolis are the Southeast Asian Draco lizards. Draco and Anolis have evolved independently of each other for at least 80 million years. Their comparison subsequently offers a special opportunity to examine mechanisms of phenotypic differentiation between two ecologically diverse, but phylogenetically distinct groups. We tested whether Draco shared ecological axes of differentiation with Anolis (e.g., habitat use), whether this differentiation reflected interspecific competition, and to what extent adaptive change in morphology has occurred along these ecological axes. Using existing data on Anolis, we compared the habitat use and morphology of Draco in a field study of allopatric and sympatric species on the Malay Peninsula, Borneo and in the Philippines. Sympatric Draco lizards partitioned the environment along common resource axes to the Anolis lizards, especially in perch use. Furthermore, the morphology of Draco was correlated with perch use in the same way as it was in Anolis: species that used wider perches exhibited longer limb lengths. These results provide an important illustration of how interspecific competition can occur along common ecological axes in different animal groups, and how natural selection along these axes can generate the same type of adaptive change in morphology." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/0ad99512d2fde0e731f82cf6f437223b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The means by which newly emerged pollen-specific (oligolectic) solitary bees locate their appropriate pollen host plant is not clearly understood. To evaluate the role of flower and pollen odors in this recognition process, preference tests were performed on foraging-inexperienced and, for comparison, field-experienced individuals of the solitary bee Colletes fulgidus longiplumosus. The bees were presented with a choice of four plant species, offered in the form of aromas from flowers, whole pollen, pollenkitt, and internal pollen lipids. Observed feeding-attempt response patterns suggest: 1) that bees can distinguish between plant species on the basis of odors from flowers, whole pollen, and pollenkitt, 2) inexperienced bees show a preference for the pollen on which they were reared as larvae, and 3) chemicals eliciting feeding responses to pollen appear to be contained in the pollenkitt. Feeding responses by experienced bees differ from those of inexperienced bees in ways which indicate that the insects' odor-based search image of the host plant becomes modified by foraging experience." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/28c33cd84ada219ed8813be6b4550443> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Genetic variation at mitochondrial cytochrome b (cyt b) and D-loop region reveals the evidence of population sub-structuring in Indian populations of highly endangered primitive feather-back fish Chitala chitala. Samples collected through commercial catches from eight riverine populations from different geographical locations of India were analyzed for cyt b region (307 bp) and D-loop region (636–716 bp). The sequences of the both the mitochondrial regions revealed high haplotype diversity and low nucleotide diversity. The patterns of genetic diversity, haplotypes networks clearly indicated two distinct mitochondrial lineages and mismatch distribution strongly suggest a historical influence on the genetic structure of C. chitala populations. The baseline information on genetic variation and the evidence of population sub-structuring generated from this study would be useful for planning effective strategies for conservation and rehabilitation of this highly endangered species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/06425a016208436dd6b20767ba2d7c3a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The ephemeral reward task provides a subject with a choice between two alternatives A and B. If it chooses alternative A, reinforcement follows and the trial is over. If it chooses alternative B, reinforcement follows but the subject can also respond to alternative A which is followed by a second reinforcement. Thus, it would be optimal to choose alternative B. Surprisingly, Salwiczek et al. (PLoS One 7:e49068, 2012. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.00490682012) reported that adult fish (cleaner wrasse) mastered this task within 100 trials, whereas monkeys and apes had great difficulty with it. The authors attributed the species differences to ecological differences in the species foraging experiences. However, Pepperberg and Hartsfield (J Comp Psychol 128:298–306, 2014) found that parrots too learned this task easily. We have found that with a similar task pigeons are not able to learn to choose optimally within 400 trials (Zentall et al. in J Comp Psychol 130:138–144, 2016). In Experiment 1 of the present study, we found that rats did not learn to choose optimally in 840 trials; however, in Experiment 2 we added a prior commitment to the initial choice by increasing delay to reinforcement for the choice response from a single lever press to the first lever press after 20 s (FI20 s). In a comparable amount of training to Experiment 1, the rats learned to choose optimally. Although the use of a prior commitment increases the delay to reinforcement, it appears to reduce impulsive responding which in turn leads to optimal choice." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d0b0d66996ec4282c758b8da80895cea> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The quality of complex communication signals, such as birdsong, is difficult to assess and compare across individuals or species. A new study on skylark song avoids the problem of signal complexity by assessing motor performance during the silent gaps of songs. This provides a metric of song quality applicable to species with very diverse songs, which facilitates novel types of analyses and comparisons in avian bioacoustics. See research article: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/12/58." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ff841b8190cd87aed7fdb73e0780d16a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract. An understanding of nutritional requirements is important for both management and restoration of mangrove areas. In this study, the effects of nutrients on three dominant Australian mangrove species (Avicennia marina, Ceriops tagal and Rhizophora stylosa) were examined in a sand culture experiment. A factorial design with three levels each of N, P and K, and two levels of NaCl, was used. Nutrient levels were selected to reflect low, medium and high concentrations found in mangrove habitats. Branching pattern, leaf expansion rate and stem and leaf growth were monitored. Medium (0.714 mM) and high (2.14 mM) N levels markedly increased leaf number in all species, and height and branching in A. marina. Interaction effects, particularly between N, P and K, were apparent. Leaf expansion was also affected by N, P and K and their interaction with salinity; however, the pattern of response differed between species. The response of these species to added nutrients reflects their ecological niches in the field, and the likely effects of high-nutrient environments. This information can assist in management decisions such as the selection of species to use in wastewater treatment, or the use of certain fertilizers to enhance growth during revegetation." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/560322c644622806b3af7ea44b9bf157> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary 1.The energetic performance and food requirements of female Phillodryas chamissonis was determined during its breeding season at different ambient temperatures. 2. If the long tailed snake is active for 24 weeks, 25 to 32 30-g rodents are required for reproduction and maintenance. This is slightly more than one rodent per week. 3. The energy cost of reproduction (38 to 48% of total metabolism) is close to the values reported for fish (35% of metabolizable energy). 4. Due to their low metabolic rates, the theoretical predation pressure (on a prey biomass basis) exerted by the snakes should be 2 to 2.5% of that expected for endothermic predators of similar body size." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/6ab2c5f2315c0435ae28a4403d2fd4c8> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Mastomys coucha and jirds infected with Acanthocheilonema viteae, a filarial species free of endosymbiontic bacteria of the genus Wolbachia, suffer lethal side effects after effective microfilaricidal therapy with diethylcarbamazine and levamisole, whereas, M. coucha infected with the Wolbachia-infested species Brugia malayi or Litomosoides carinii tolerate corresponding treatment. Mortality in A. viteae infected, treated animals varied with microfilariae density in the blood. It was up to 100% in highly microfilaraemic M. coucha and jirds, but low or absent in animals with low microfilariae counts. Deaths occurred in most cases 5–24 h after treatment. Characteristic symptoms in animals, which died subsequently were a rapid drop in body temperature by 4–7°C, an increase in hematokrit values by up to 10% and a moderate blood acidosis. Lethal effects in A. viteae infections did not depend on a particular status of hypersensitivity of the animals since desensitization procedures, which protected infected M. coucha against an otherwise lethal intravenous challenge with A. viteae homogenate did not protect against adverse reactions to a subsequent microfilaricidal treatment. The animals were protected from treatment induced death by injection of N-LMMA. Thus the final morbific agent seems NO. The data show that adverse effects after effective microfilaricidal therapy may be caused by microfilariae derived components different from Wolbachia-released LPS." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/3df10f04b25f1bced774a409f31594c3> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The production of shoots from roots (adventitious bud and shoot formation, root sprouting) first attracted attention in the 19th century as a morphological rarity. At that time, the first checklists of plants capable of root sprouting were compiled. Since then, experiments have proven that the ability to produce buds on roots serves the purpose of bud bank formation or represents a mode of clonal growth. The former enables resprouting after injury whereas the latter facilitates foraging for nutrients and vegetative multiplication. However, only a small proportion of root-sprouters have been studied so far, and for most of them we lack detailed data on the anatomy, morphology, ecology and physiology of adventitious shoot formation. These knowledge gaps hinder further understanding of their ecology and evolution. To support researchers interested in adventitious bud and shoot formation in any field of plant science, we compiled a list of plants considered capable of root sprouting based on the literature and the CLO-PLA database for the flora of the Czech Republic. Here we provide basic comparisons concerning the distribution of root sprouting ability among life history types, plants differing in rarity and invasive status, and taxonomic groups. Altogether 342 plant species are reported to be root-sprouters, i.e. 10% of the Czech flora. Root-sprouters are most commonly found among woody plants, less so among non-clonal perennial herbs, biennials and clonal herbs, and least commonly among annuals. Root-sprouters are more common among alien plants (especially woody ones) than among red-listed plants. Root sprouting usually plays a supplementary (facultative) or regenerative role in the plant life cycle. Root-sprouters occur in 64 families, mostly of dicots. The greatest number of root-sprouters belong to the Asteraceae and Rosaceae families (41). We have only rudimentary information on 145 species out of the 342 (42%) species that are regarded as root-sprouters." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/c9c6cd0cec4f41917c24b0485bb933f3> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The return of willow ptarmigans to the sites in which they nested the previous year has been studied using color banding. No factors influencing the return index have been revealed, except for its dependence in males on the time when spring begins in a given year. In northernYamal, in contrast to the temperate zone, some surviving birds fail to return to their former nesting sites. Polymorphism of individuals with respect to territorial behavioral strategy is proposed for L. lagopus populations at the northern boundary of the species range." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/83fd922baa043d4c0f37c1287d539e4f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Various local processes simultaneously shape ecological assemblages. β-diversity is a useful metric for inferring the underlying mechanisms of community assembly. However, β-diversity is not independent of γ-diversity, which may mask the local mechanisms that govern community processes across regions. Recent approaches that rely on an abundance-based null model could solve this sampling issue. However, if abundance varies widely across a region, the relative roles of deterministic and stochastic processes may be substantially misestimated. Furthermore, there is additional uncertainty as to whether null models used to correct γ-dependence in β-diversity should be independent of the observed patterns of species abundance distributions or whether the models should reflect these patterns. Here, we aim to test what null models with various constraints imply about the underlying processes shaping β-diversity. First, we found that an abundance-driven sampling effect could substantially influence the calculation of γ-corrected β-diversity. Second, we found that the null models that preserve the species abundance patterns could better reflect empirical patterns of spatial organization of individuals. The different implications generated from different applications of the null model approach therefore suggest that there are still frontiers regarding how local processes that shape species assemblages should be quantified. Carefully exploring each facet within different assembly processes is important." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/6e10ab87408b62e67125b65378b70cb7> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract One goal of conservation biology is the assessment of effects of land use change on species distribution. One approach for identifying the factors, which determine habitat suitability for a species are statistical habitat distribution models. These models are quantitative and can be used for predictions in management scenarios. However, they often have one major shortcoming, which is their complexity. This means that they need several, often costly-to-determine parameters for predictions of species occurrence. We first used habitat suitability models to investigate and determine habitat preferences of three different Orthoptera species. Second, we compared the predictive powers of simple habitat suitability models considering only the ‘habitat type’ as predictor with more complex models taking different habitat factors into account. We found that the habitat type is the most reliable and robust factor, which determines the occurrence of the species studied. Thus, analyses of habitat suitability can easily be carried out on the basis of existing vegetation maps for the conservation of the three species under study. Our results can serve as a basis for the estimation of spatio-temporal distribution and survival probabilities of the species studied and might also be valuable for other species living in dry grasslands." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/963df32f81dcbdd7f24eb5d6069cc2d4> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata L.) is one of the most important marine fish species produced in southern European countries. Over the last two decades, microsatellites have become a powerful tool for DNA studies of fish populations, making it possible to establish existing genealogical relationships between individuals and to perform reliable estimates of genetic parameters. In the present study, a total of 7959 fish (494 breeders and 7465 fry) were genotyped using two rounds of multiplex reactions with four microsatellite markers each. Offspring were assigned based on the Mendelian exclusion principles, using FAP program. Genealogical information was successfully obtained for more than 83 % of the progeny. Heritability estimates were close to 0.40 in all cases and for all considered traits. The lowest value was for the length at first age (350 ± 6 dph) and the highest for the length at the second age (500 ± 7 dph). The heritabilities for the first and the second weight were similar although somewhat higher for the second age, but not significant. The highest genetic correlations were found between weight and length at the same age and the lowest between weight and length at different ages. Based on the results of this study, it seems reasonable to expect that the implementation of a breeding program for improved growth in this population of gilthead sea bream will offer comparable performances to those achieved in other populations and species of great success in aquaculture around the world." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9dc2a697957164047c521bbb9e314ecb> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The interaction of immature black-legged ticks, Ixodes scapularis, with reptiles and rodents was investigated in various woodland habitats in the coastal plain of North Carolina. Reptiles were sampled from April 1 to September 30, 1991. No ticks were found on 95 specimens representing 16 species of snakes. Ticks were found on 54 (36.7%) of 147 lizards. I. scapularis was the only tick recovered from lizards. Some lizards were collected in drift fence traps each month of the study except August. Capture rates averaged one lizard per 16 trap-days. Larvac and nymphs of I. scapularis were removed from the southeastern five-lined skink (Eumeces inexpectatus), the ground skink (Scincella lateralis), the broad-headed skink (E. laticeps) and the eastem glass lizard (Ophisaurus ventralis), but ticks were not found on three other lizard species. Tick infestation rates and loads for parasitized species are presented. Ticks were almost exlusively attached at the base or in the axils of forelimbs of skinks and in the lateral grooves of eastern glass lizards. Rodents were live-trapped at sites where lizards were sampled and at other sites from 1 July, 1990 to 30 January, 1992. Capture rates averaged one rodent per 47 trap-nights. Ticks were found on 23 (17.8%) of 129 animals inspected. Five species of rodents were examined but only four species were found to be tick-infested. In contrast to lizards, few I. scapularis were collected. Rodents, principally the white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus) and cotton mouse (P. gossypinus) were most frequently infested with immature American dog ticks, Dermacentor variabilis, during winter and early spring months. Burdens of D. variabilis on these rodents averaged 0.3 ticks per rodent. Effects of the diversion of ticks from feeding on Peromyscus mice on the transmission of the Lyme disease spirochete are discussed." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a6a16473b6a48881ad262b5a256f41a4> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Multivariate analyses of vegetation data have been restricted to a single scale of sampling, or multiscale sampling has been restricted to a single species. However, vegetation scientists need to be able to explore spatial relationships of many species over many scales. We present a modification of Noy-Meir & Anderson's (1971) method of multiscale ordination by summing two-term local covariance matrices and smoothing the component profiles. The advantages of our method are: 1) results are less subject to the starting position of the transect, 2) matrices may be added at any block size, and 3) plots of factor scores are smoothed by a moving weighted average to better reveal patterns at a prescribed scale. This procedure provides statistical associations of species over a range of scales. The scales which exhibit the association to the maximum extent are then determined from multiscale ordination. The relationships of different associations and their scales can then be examined. The application of the method to fabricated data proved successful in recovering the structure built into the data. When used on real vegetation data, from a community and a landscape, the method revealed the details of species associations over a range of scales, and of the relationships among associations." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/817f6c556d579e47dcec06965a46ca5d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The eddy correlation technique was used to investigate the influence of biophysical variables and crop phenological phases on the behaviour of ecosystem carbon fluxes of a maize crop, in two contrasting growing seasons. In 2009, the reduced water supply during the early growing stage limited leaf area expansion, thus negatively affecting canopy photosynthesis. The variability of gross primary production (GPP) and ecosystem respiration (R eco) was mainly explained by seasonal variation of leaf area index (LAI). The seasonal variation of R eco was positively influenced by soil temperatures (T soil) in 2008 but not in 2009. In 2008, a contribution of both autotrophic and heterotrophic components to total R eco could be hypothesized, while during 2009, autotrophic respiration is supposed to be the most important component. Crop phenological phases affected the response of ecosystem fluxes to biophysical drivers." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/47614c4ca4ea6e28adc4ae6e94cd1d61> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary A new serotype of calicivirus, designated as San Miguel sea lion virus type 6 (SMSV-6), was isolated from vesicular lesions on the flipper of a California sea lion pup. Serologic studies show that SMSV-6 neutralizing antibodies (SN) occur frequently among California sea lions and occasionally among northern fur seals. Feral swine, 1- to 6-week elephant seal pups and grey whales tested negative for SMSV-6 antibody." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/166daa24608263579a5ec589ab6a66bb> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The dependence on light and temperature of the apparent photosynthetic rate was studied on ecotypes of Trifolium repens from different altitudes in the alps (600–2040 m above sea level). Due to the altitude, the natural habitats have different temperature conditions. At the higher altitudes the light conditions for the growing plants vary due to grazing or cutting management of these meadows. Accordingly, for this study the plants were grown at different temperatures and light intensities in growth cabinets. High altitude plants had higher photosynthetic rates, especially when measured at low temperatures. According to the light conditions, dependent on management, in the alpine habitats the ecotypes differed in their photosynthetic properties like sun and shade plants. It is stated, that the photosynthetic performance as well as the acclimation capacity to the growth conditions is related to the altitude of the habitats and probably also to the agricultural management." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/1232e4f554e592c1f2c954040b6a4808> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Over the past few years, harmful algal blooms (HABs), such as red tides, have been frequently observed in coastal zones worldwide. The natural allelopathic interactions among macroalgae and red tide microalgae can alter the structure and succession of aquatic ecosystems. We investigated the influence of four environmental factors (temperature, salinity, light, and pH) on the allelopathic effects of the macroalgae Corallina pilulifera on red-tide forming Heterosigma akashiwo under laboratory conditions. Each of the factors had four levels: temperature (15, 20, 25, and 30°C), salinity (10, 20, 30, and 40), light (20, 100, 200 and 400 μmol/(m2∙s)), and pH (5.5, 7, 8.5, and 10. Two-factor experiments were designed for each two environmental factors, with six combination treatments (temperature-salinity, temperature-light, temperature-pH, salinity-light, salinity-pH, and light-pH). Results showed that the allelopathic effect was significantly influenced by temperature, salinity, light, and pH. As single factors, the low temperature (15°C), low salinity (10), high-intensity light (400 μmol/(m2∙s)), and high pH (10) treatments substantially enhanced the allelopathic effect. The strongest allelopathic effect of C. pilulifera on H. akashiwo was observed under the following treatments: 15°C and salinity of 40, 25°C and pH 10, 25°C with medium- to high-intensity light at 200–400 μmol/(m 2 ∙s), 400 μmol/(m2∙s) and salinity of 10, 400 μmol/(m2∙s) and pH 10, and pH 10 with a salinity of 40." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8e610270d6978fe30dabf1d8de3335ca> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Experiment 1 showed that laboratory-reared desert kangaroo rats, like domestic Norway rats, efficiently search for food on a radial arm maze (RAM) by avoiding revisiting arms within a trial. By placing an RAM on the floor so the animals could approach food from any direction, Experiment 2 tested whether efficient search by kangaroo rats was based on tactics of distance minimizing, central-place foraging, trail following, or meandering. In contrast to the dominant trail-following tactic of domestic Norway rats (Hoffman, Timberlake, Leffel, & Gont, 1999), kangaroo rats tended to distance minimize, whether maze arms were present or not. Experiment 3 indicated that kangaroo rats treated a floor configuration of eight food cups as twopatches of four, based on beeline travel between patches and meandering within them. We conclude that similar performance in an elevated RAM by different species can be based on different tactics, and we suggest that a laboratory apparatus can be used to cast light on niche-related mechanisms." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2d9410ed2a1217cb8ba04f3e96d8b0a5> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The effect of a doubling in the atmospheric CO2 concentration on the growth of vegetative whole plants was investigated. In a compilation of literature sources, the growth stimulation of 156 plant species was found to be on average 37%. This enhancement is small compared to what could be expected on the basis of CO2-response curves of photosynthesis. The causes for this stimulation being so modest were investigated, partly on the basis of an experiment with 10 wild plant species. Both the source-sink relationship and size constraints on growth can cause the growth-stimulating effect to be transient. Data on the 156 plant species were used to explore interspecific variation in the response of plants to high CO2. The growth stimulation was larger for C3 species than for C4 plants. However the difference in growth stimulation is not as large as expected as C4 plants also significantly increased in weight (41% for C3 vs. 22% for C4). The few investigated CAM species were stimulated less in growth (15%) than the average C4 species. Within the group of C3 species, herbaceous crop plants responded more strongly than herbaceous wild species (58%vs. 35%) and potentially fast-growing wild species increased more in weight than slow-growing species (54%vs. 23%). C3 species capable of symbiosis with N2-fixing organisms had higher growth stimulations compared to other C3 species. A common denominator in these 3 groups of more responsive C3 plants might be their large sink strength. Finally, there was some tendency for herbaceous dicots to show a larger response than monocots. Thus, on the basis of this literature compilation, it is concluded that also within the group of C3 species differences exist in the growth response to high CO2." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/bede1771a77e352f5f05b5a00c0b4290> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Storage of carbohydrates in organs protected from disturbance is an important adaptation of plants in disturbed habitats. We carried out a field experiment involving 31 herbaceous plant species in two cultural meadows to find out whether roots or belowground stem-derived organs (stem bases, stem tubers and rhizomes) are the main storage organs, to study how reserves accumulate in individual organs in the long term (growing season) and to ascertain whether meadow abandonment affects the distribution of carbohydrate reserves in plants. We also conducted a 22-day pot experiment with four meadow plant species to determine how removal of roots and aboveground parts affects the use of carbohydrates stored in roots and stem-derived organs in the short term. From the long-term perspective of the field experiment, mowing had a positive effect on the concentration of carbohydrate reserves. From the short-term perspective of the pot experiment, however, the effect on concentration and pools of carbohydrates was negative. In the field experiment, carbohydrate concentrations before winter were generally higher than in mid-season, and more often higher in roots than in stem-derived organs. Roots and stem-derived organs of plants in the pot experiment were depleted similarly after both types of disturbance. Our results indicate a need for including both types of belowground plant organs in future studies of the carbon economy of plants from disturbed habitats." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/3900e091fb060f8dd41472c543a1d1e4> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Declines in large vertebrate populations are widespread but difficult to detect from monitoring data and hard to understand due to a multiplicity of plausible biological explanations. In parts of Scotland, harbour seals (Phoca vitulina) have been in decline for 10 years. To evaluate the contributions of different proximate causes (survival, fecundity, observation artefacts) to this decline, we collated behavioural, demographic and population data from one intensively studied population in part of the Moray Firth (north-east Scotland). To these, we fit a state-space model comprising age-structured dynamics and a detailed account of observation errors. After accounting for culling (estimated by our model as 14 % of total mortality), the main driver of the historical population decline was a decreasing trend in survival of young individuals combined with (previously unrecognised) low levels of pupping success. In more recent years, the model provides evidence for considerable increases in breeding success and consistently high levels of adult survival. However, breeding success remains the most volatile demographic component of the population. Forecasts from the model indicate a slow population recovery, providing cautious support for recent management measures. Such investigations of the proximate causes of population change (survival, fecundity and observation errors) provide valuable short-term support for the management of population declines, helping to focus future data collection on those ultimate causal mechanisms that are not excluded by the demographic evidence. The contribution of specific ultimate drivers (e.g. shooting mortality or competitors) can also be quantified by including them as covariates to survival or fecundity." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/7e830c68024e24e4e84f558b456aae92> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract There is an increasing need to consider the water use of horticultural plants grown in arid and semi-arid garden settings. Species that originate from arid and semi-arid regions are often considered suitable for xeriscaping, but there have been relatively few direct measurements of important water relations parameters such as gas exchange, resistance to cavitation, and water use efficiency (WUE) in irrigated urban gardens. In this study, we compared plant gas exchange, cavitation resistance, and WUE in evergreen shrub species from arid, temperate, and tropical environments grown in an irrigated common garden environment. Contrary to expectations, arid and non-riparian species had greater transpiration rates than temperate and riparian species, and lower specific leaf area than tropical and riparian species. Temperate species had the highest WUE as measured with the isotopic composition of leaf soluble sugar. Cavitation resistance and maximum hydraulic conductivity were not different among species from different biomes. These results indicate that under well-watered conditions, species from temperate environments may use less water than species from arid environments. In addition, native habitat is not a strong predictor of resistance to cavitation, which has implications for plant responses to water stress and drought." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4143b2333bae9e82d8413be681fa9138> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The susceptibility of two fish and four mosquito species to the Caiman yacare haemoparasite Hepatozoon caimani was experimentally investigated. Mosquitoes belonging to four species (Aedes fluviatilis, Aedes albopictus, Aedes aegypti and Culex quinquefasciatus) were blood-fed on two naturally infected C. yacare from the Central-West Region of Brazil that exhibited distinct levels of parasitaemia: caimans A (11.05 %) and B (1.25 %). None of the engorged A. fluviatilis, A. albopictus or A. aegypti mosquitoes fed on caiman A survived for the duration of the sporogonic cycle; the great majority of the engorged mosquitoes died within 48 h of the blood meal. All A. aegypti fed on caiman B were negative, whereas 91.3 % of dissected C. quinquefasciatus fed on the same caiman contained oocysts. Characid fish—Metynnis sp. and Astyanax sp.—were individually fed with C. quinquefasciatus females previously engorged (21–23 days) on caiman B. No parasite was found in the Astyanax fish. By contrast, 100 % of the Metynnis fish depicted numerous cysts harbouring cystozoites identical to those of H. caimani, even more than 8 months after the ingestion of the infected mosquitoes. The cysts were located near the veins of the liver and, in some cases, close to the tunica intima of these vessels. No inflammatory reaction was observed. Gametocytes were observed in the blood smears of juvenile caimans that had ingested infected fish 9–12 weeks earlier. The potential role of fish as paratenic vertebrate hosts of H. caimani in nature is discussed." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/7a51d7aee9cea1bff4a419769c859591> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Sparse records and discontinuous and/or poor chronologically resolved data hinder construction of reliable palaeoenvironmental sequences for the interior of South Africa. Wonderwerk Cave occupies a central position in the interior where the Kalahari Thornveld/dry woodland vegetation and generally arid conditions are expected to be sensitive to subtle past climate perturbations, and evidence from this site has been key to forming views on environmental change in the interior. A compilation of existing data including principal component analysis of pollen suggested broad trends, ranging from variably arid and open in the early Holocene to moister conditions from about 7500 to 5000 years, followed by aridity thereafter. In an effort to better establish the nature and timing of shifts from the Late Pleistocene sequence onwards, we analyse carbon and oxygen isotope ratios in a robust sample of ostrich eggshell from Wonderwerk Cave. The resulting data are then placed within a temporal framework established by Bayesian modelling of existing radiocarbon dates and compared against shifts in the Wonderwerk cultural sequence. Several shifts and trends in aridity include an arid to moist shift in layer 4b near 6000 years, coincident with a cultural shift within the Wilton assemblage, and thereafter an aridification trend culminating at about 2000 years with the appearance of the ceramic LSA." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b8d2fa9346f2d7562fe2276f9510f38d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Stream and riparian food webs are connected by reciprocal fluxes of invertebrates, and a growing number of studies demonstrate strong effects of these subsidies on consumers and food webs in both habitats. However, despite its importance in understanding energy flow between these habitats, seasonality of reciprocal subsidies has been examined only in a single temperate system in Japan. We measured input of terrestrial invertebrates and emergence of adult aquatic insects for 14 months in two adjacent streams in a coastal Mediterranean basin in California to assess seasonal patterns, annual fluxes, and local variation. Fluxes of terrestrial and aquatic invertebrates fluctuated seasonally and were relatively synchronous, although in the fall of 2004, terrestrial inputs peaked 1–2 months earlier than emergence. Terrestrial inputs were similar in the two streams with annual flux of 7.9–8.6 g dry mass m−2 year−1. Emergence differed between the streams: annual emergence was 7.8 g m−2 year−1 (similar to terrestrial flux) in one reach but 5.3 g m−2 year−1 from the other. The presence of streambed travertine in the reach with lower emergence was the primary difference in habitat between the streams, suggesting that travertine may reduce emergence and alter net reciprocal flux. Comparison of our results with those from Japan suggests that seasonality and net annual flux of reciprocal stream-riparian subsidies vary among biomes due to differences in climate, vegetation, and geography. Our results also indicate that local factors, such as travertine, may cause reciprocal fluxes to vary at finer spatial scales." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/052abbf6586160d72b9c2054073b96e3> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract We examined the manner in which animals adjust the proportion of energy allocated to growth and storage in response to food availability. We compared univariate growth and length-mass relationships between juvenile adders (Vipera berus) reared under two different feeding regimes. Animals in the low- and high-food experimental groups were fed suckling mice once and twice weekly, respectively. Snout-vent length, body mass, and body condition (residual scores from log-log regression of body mass on snout-vent length) were measured shortly after birth, and at 4, 9, and 14 weeks. We found that growth in length and mass, as well as changes in length-mass relationships, differed between treatments; snakes with access to more food not only increased faster in length but were also heavier at the completion of the experiment than were similar sized less frequently fed snakes. There was no association between body condition of individuals measured at birth and at the end of the experiment, whereas size at birth was a good predictor of final size. Our results provide evidence for resource-dependent allocation strategies in V. berus, and suggest that somatic growth is less sensitive to environmental fluctuations than body condition, presumably because body size is of greater importance for fitness." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/3aaadba57c0ef9460e965d86d3ca35d3> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Part of the abandoned cropland in Mediterranean landscapes is being subjected to afforestation dominated by pines. Here we simultaneously evaluate the effect of three categories of factors as predictors of the interspecific variation in bird habitat occupancy of fragmented afforestations, namely regional distribution, habitat preferences, and life-history traits of species. We use the “natural experiment” that highly fragmented pine plantations of central Spain represent due to the prevailing pattern of land ownership of small properties. Many species with marked habitat preferences for woodland habitats were very scarce or were never recorded in this novel habitat within a matrix of deforested agricultural landscape. Interspecific variability in occurrence was mainly explained by regional distribution patterns: occurrence was significantly and positively associated with the proportion of occupied 10 × 10 UTM km squares around the study area, habitat breadth, and population trend of species in the period 1998–2011. It was also positively associated with regional occupancy of mature and large pine plantations. Other predictor variables related to habitat preferences (for woodland, agricultural and urban habitats) or life-history traits (migratory strategy, body mass, and clutch size) were unrelated to the occurrence of species. Thus, small man-made pinewood islands funded by the Common Agrarian Policy within a landscape dominated by Mediterranean agricultural habitats only capture widespread and habitat generalist avian species with increasing population trends, not contributing to enhance truly woodland species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/94c4b41ce40b6b98ccf7f30c02111aab> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract This paper summarizes expected changes in hydrology, chemistry and biota of Dutch peatlands (bogs, fens and moorland pools) caused by climatic changes resulting from the Greenhouse Effect. Special attention is paid to the interaction with atmospheric acid deposition. In both bogs and moorland pools prolonged drought periods may cause deleterious effects on biota because of the release of atmospherically-derived reduced sulphur compounds. In fenlands negative changes will be caused by eutrophication due to increased supply of allochtonous water. Long-term water and nutrient budgets are needed, along with better predictions of expected climate changes, to develop models of changes in hydrology, chemistry and biota of peatlands." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e6bf0cf60d77ad3995cb1caba5c5cf21> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary March 1981 and 1984 Euphausia superba populations were compared using acoustics and net catches near Elephant Island, the South Shetlands, and in the Bransfield Strait. In 1981, krill tended to form large, thick swarms and in 1984, smaller, more dispersed, shallower patches. March body lengths of juvenile-adult krill were 22–59 mm in 1981 and 13–59 mm in 1984. Near Elephant I. in 1981, krill >45 mm were most numerous; in 1984 sizes <45 mm were dominant. In March 1984, the larger (>45 mm) body-size group was prereproductive and occurred from just west of Elephant I. westward into waters north of the South Shetlands; in 1981 the larger krill were postreproductive and more widely distributed in the Elephant I. area. Overall, netted postlarval krill, 1981 vs. 1984, averaged 73 vs. 48 individuals/m2, or 54 vs. 16 g/m2; acoustic biomass estimates were 229 vs. 134–201 g/m2. Larvae near Elephant I. averaged >2000/m2 in 1981 vs. <1/m2 in 1984—compatible with respective March reproductive states. Net-type comparisons revealed short-term (15 min to 6h) variability of a similar scale in both MOCNESS and bongo net catches, but bongo abundances averaged greater. Variation in maturity composition across 1981 swarms, patches, and random transects was like variation among the random 1984 tows; spatial distributions were more heterogeneous in 1984. The March 1984 krill of 20–44 mm (Year-2, mode 34 mm) relate to November 1983 krill of 9–30 mm (mode 21 mm), indicating growth averaging 12 mm during the season. Body-lengths and size-frequency modes of Year-2 and combined Years-3,3+ krill from comparable Feb-Mar data collected since 1968 suggest trends between times when (1) Year-2 krill average small and peak reproduction seems to be late in the season and/or weak (1979, 1982–1984), and (2) Year-2 krill are larger, and reproduction is possibly earlier and more successful (1976, 1980, 1981)." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2bbbee8b2fd2837ea68f2f1e0e9585ae> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract. The geometrical complexity in the wings of several, taxonomically different butterflies, is analyzed in terms of their fractal dimension. Preliminary results provide some evidence on important questions about the (dis)similarity of the wing patterns in terms of their fractal dimension. The analysis is restricted to two groups which are widely used in the literature as typical examples of mimicry, and a small number of unrelated species, thus implying the consideration of only a fraction of the wing pattern diversity. The members of the first mimicry ring, composed by the species Danaus plexippus (better known as the monarch butterfly), and the two subspecies Basilarchia archippus obsoleta (or northern viceroy) and Basilarchia archippus hoffmanni (or tropical viceroy), are found to have a very similar value for the fractal dimension of their wing patterns, even though they do not look very similar at first sight. It is also found that the female of another species (Neophasia terlootii), which looks similar to the members of the previous group, does not share the same feature, while the Lycorea ilione albescens does share it. For the members of the second group of mimicry related butterflies, the Greta nero nero and the Hypoleria cassotis, it is shown that they also have very close values for the fractal dimension of their wing patterns. Finally, it is shown that other species, which apparently have very similar wing patterns, do not have the same fractal dimension. A possible, not completely tested hypothesis is then conjectured: the formation of groups by individuals whose wing patterns have an almost equal fractal dimension may be due to the fact that they do share the same developmental raw material, and that this common feature is posteriorly modified by natural selection, possibly through predation." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9ead5e1f1576e1910a6f26b391ebd041> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Effects of nitrogen amendments on spring annual plant distribution, primary production, and species diversity in a semi-arid environment were studied. The ecological responses of spring annual plant species to nitrogen differed between species, and between sites. The distribution of each species in a control transect was wider than in a nitrogen-treated transect. Annual plant species diversity at each station in the control transect was higher than that of the nitrogen-treated transect. The lower site of the Lower Basin Slope areas had the highest species diversity (0.94 for the control and 0.84 for the nitrogen-treated), and the Upper Basin Slope area, shrub vegetation zone, had the lowest species diversity (0.27 for the control and 0.05 for the nitrogen-treated) in both transects. Inorganic nitrogen in the nitrogen-treated transect soils was consistently higher than that in the control transect soils; however, the former showed more fluctuation from station to station than the latter. Above-ground biomass of spring annual plants in the nitrogen-treated transect was consistently higher than that in the control at each station. The maximum above-ground biomass in the control and nitrogen-treated transect was 24.4±4.4 gm−2 and 61.2±10.6 gm−2, respectively. Variations in above-ground biomass along the transect did not parallel with the variation in inorganic nitrogen in soils and species diversity." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/5db03303265400eec5d507b59e8fe747> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract An alkali-tolerant bacterium, Pseudomonas aeruginosa STK 03 (accession number KR011154), isolated from an oil spill site, was evaluated for the biodegradation of free cyanide and thiocyanate under alkaline conditions. The organism had a free cyanide degradation efficiency of 80 and 32 % from an initial concentration of 250 and 450 mg CN−/L, respectively. Additionally, the organism was able to degrade thiocyanate, achieving a degradation efficiency of 78 and 98 % from non- and free cyanide spiked cultures, respectively. The organism was capable of heterotrophic nitrification but was unable to denitrify aerobically. The organism was unable to degrade free cyanide in the absence of a carbon source, but it was able to degrade thiocyanate heterotrophically, achieving a degradation efficiency of 79 % from an initial concentration of 250 mg SCN−/L. Further increases in thiocyanate degradation efficiency were only observed when the cultures were spiked with free cyanide (50 mg CN−/L), achieving a degradation efficiency of 98 % from an initial concentration of 250 mg SCN−/L. This is the first study to report free cyanide and thiocyanate degradation by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The higher free cyanide and thiocyanate tolerance of the isolate STK 03, which surpasses the stipulated tolerance threshold of 200 mg CN−/L for most organisms, could be valuable in microbial consortia for the degradation of cyanides in an industrial setting." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/3b48d427a148abd03f20315c5e41fe08> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Changes in body weights of four species of small rodents were monitored to evaluate the method of toe-clipping for individual identification. If carefully applied the method was found to be without any biologically meaningful effects on the animals. Secondly, body weight changes in prolonged live-trapping studies were evaluated in five species of small rodents. It was found that the animals generally do not recover from the stress of trapping within 24 h. Absolute weight losses were small on a daily basis but mounted up when animals were trapped day after day." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a1681c7e5d57927fbf35b6c2bb19a92a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Two facets of plant competition, competitive effect (CE) and competitive response (CR), can be used to explain plant community composition but our understanding of abiotic factors that may differentially affect species’ competitive ability is incomplete. We tested whether water-depth affected CE (ability to suppress neighbour) and CR (avoid suppression from neighbour), and if so whether there was consistence in the rank order of both measures of competition under different water depth treatments. CE and CR were measured and compared for eight wetland plant species (Carex lurida, Carex tribuloides, Elymus virginicus, Juncus tenuis, Lythrum salicaria, Phalaris arundinacea, Rumex orbiculatus and Verbesina alternifolia) at five different water-depth treatments (+2, 0, −2, −4 and −6 cm relative to the substrate). Overall, we found that mean CE was at its lowest value at +2 cm water depth, while mean CR was highest at +2 and −6 cm compared to the other water treatments. There was a significant variation of CE between species, with a defined hierarchical order. Pairwise CE rank order correlations between water depth treatments were significant but CR correlations were generally not. There was no significant correlation between CE and CR. CE was significantly correlated with biomass of species grown alone but CR was not. These findings indicate that CE may be used as a general measure to predict wetland species performance, and thus community assemblage, across a range of water depths. CR does not seem to demonstrate predicable patterns between species and water depth treatments. Our results suggest that competition intensity may be reduced in a non-resource-stressed flooded environment by a reduction in CE, but the corresponding increase in CR could dampen this effect on overall competitive ability." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b20a74dd4def4bef3c4dc92cfe025d9d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract. The aim of the study was to investigate if scale morphology could be used to discriminate fish populations at a local scale. To this aim, 168 rostrum dace (Leuciscus leuciscus burdigalensis) were collected at 3 sites in the River Viaur (SW France), distributed along 82 Km of stream. Seventy-one measurements were taken from scales: 2 shape factors and 69 Fourier coefficients. A stepwise discriminant analysis revealed that fish from the 3 sites showed morphological differences (p < 0.001), with an average of 75.6% correct discrimination of the scales (65.5% after the cross-validation procedure). These results reveal that scale morphology can detect spatial structure in fish populations at a fine scale, which has implications for riverine fish conservation." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4637623083cf153f87af8b705956dc2f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Nuclear ITS sequences and ISSR profiles provide evidence that Raoulia rubra is endemic to the Tararua Range in the southern part of the North Island of New Zealand. Populations in the South Island previously ascribed to R. rubra are better ascribed to R. eximia. Our findings suggest that glaciation of the central mountains of the South Island during the last ice age have had a major impact on the evolution of the South Island cushion Raoulia species in New Zealand. However, simple hypotheses accounting for the effect of Pleistocene climate change are insufficient to explain patterns of endemism in the group." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ec3ae361c51c724871b7565a4a59b89c> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Tungiasis is an ectoparasitic disease caused by fleas of the genus Tunga. The disease is reported to occur mostly in human populations. In wildlife, however, the occurrence and impact of this disease remains uncertain. We captured and examined 12 free-ranging jaguars for the presence of Tunga penetrans in the Pantanal region of Mato Grosso do Sul state, Brazil. Tungiasis prevalence was 100% in the population; lesions were confined to the jaguar’s paws. T. penetrans was identified based on the characteristics of the embedded fleas and the morphological identification of a collected free-living flea. The intensity and stage of infestation varied between individual animals. However, in general, all captured jaguars were in good health. The 100% prevalence of tungiasis may be related to the fact that all captures were performed during the dry season. Their high ecological requirements for space make jaguars potential disseminators of T. penetrans in the Pantanal region. Because cattle ranching and ecotourism are the main economic activities in the Pantanal, further studies should evaluate the risks of tungiasis to human and animal health. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of tungiasis in jaguars." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f65f36a319062c9cb3cb4826b4bd237a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract. By taking samples along individual branches and measuring leaf size, thickness and Na+ and K+ concentrations, we have shown in Bruguiera cylindrica, Avicennia rumphiana and Avicennia marina that there are two phases of salt accumulation by leaves. This is confirmed by re-analysis of published data for other species. The first phase is a rapid increase in leaf content as it grows from bud to maturity; the second is a slower but continuous change in quantity in the leaf, via changes in ion concentration and/or in leaf thickening. Leaf thickening must not be overlooked in estimating changes in leaf contents with age. Generally, leaf Na+ content increases significantly, and K+ content falls slightly. Mangrove leaves thus continue as sinks for Na+ throughout their lifetime. At the end of a leaf's life, just before abscission, no burst of salt accumulation has been found. Yellow, senescent leaves do not have higher Na+ than old green ones. We point out that leaf drop involves losing both salt and biomass, not just salt, and hence does not reduce the salt concentration in the plant. We conclude that leaf drop is not a salt excretion mechanism, but is simply the point in time at which the leaf ceases to accumulate salt. Using a simple model, the contribution to salt accumulation of slowly accumulated Na+ by mature leaves has been calculated. For B. cylindrica, the most extensively studied species, 60% of the salt in the leaf is accumulated slowly in the mature phase, thus more than during the initial phase of rapid expansion growth. The limited data suggest that gland-bearing species show smaller changes in mature leaf Na+ content than do gland-less species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a755d0ccc238ce80a596585e1b946e05> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Among aquatic organisms suitable for biological monitoring, molluscs occupy a prominent place due to their wide geographic distribution, their abundance and accessibility in the field as well as in aquaculture. Molluscs reflect the degree of environmental contamination and are the most useful bioindicator tools. The study of modulation of immune system or immunomodulation in marine molluscs has become one of the privileged ways for evaluating the physiological effects of environmental factors. Physiological responses of molluscs to environmental stresses could be mediated by haemocytes. These cells are continually exposed to the external environment due to the open circulatory system of molluscs and are affected by pollutants. In fact, several studies showed the effects of different environmental contaminants on haemocyte functions (viability, phagocytosis, ROS production) as well as on proteins involved in cytoskeletal structure maintenance using the in vitro approaches. In ecotoxicology, in vitro approach is an alternative to animal testing due to the reduced use of experimental animals, low cost and rapid performance. Although several studies showed the importance of using in vitro cell models to determine the effects of different environmental contaminants on haemocyte parameters in marine molluscs, a few reviews highlight these effects. The main purpose of this paper is to summarize the recent data on the effect of some xenobiotics on haemocyte parameters in some mollusc species and then suggest future research prospects." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a5adb4c355d52aee7e37f527f7558dc4> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Life is uncertain. To reduce uncertainty and make adaptive decisions, individuals need to collect information. Individuals often visit the breeding sites of their conspecifics (i.e., “prospect”), likely to assess conspecifics’ reproductive success and to use such information to identify high-quality spots for future breeding. We investigated whether visitation rate by prospectors and success of visited sites are causally linked. We manipulated the reproductive success (enlarged, reduced, and control broods) in a nest-box population of migratory pied flycatchers, Ficedula hypoleuca, in Finland. We measured the visitation rates of prospectors at 87 nest-boxes continuously from manipulation (day 3 after hatching) to fledging. 302 adult pied flycatchers prospected 9194 times on these manipulated nests (at least 78% of detected prospectors were successful breeders). While the number of visitors and visits was not influenced by the relative change in brood size we induced, the resulting absolute brood size predicted the prospecting behaviour: the larger the brood size after manipulation, the more visitors and visits a nest had. The parental provisioning rate at a nest and brood size pre-manipulation did not predict the number of visitors or visits post-manipulation. More visitors, however, inspected early than late nests and broods in good condition. Our study suggests that individuals collect social information when visiting conspecific nests during breeding and provides evidence that large broods attract more visitors than small broods. We discuss the results in light of individual decision-making by animals in their natural environments." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2806bef935cd08cfeb422a62079a2d07> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Walls are often considered secondary habitats for vegetation of natural rock surfaces. Compared with rocks, walls differ in many features, for example the presence of a binding material (mainly calcareous mortar), location in settlements and exposure to human impact. A data set of 1,205 phytosociological relevés recorded on horizontal wall tops, wall verticals and rock verticals in the Czech Republic was used to compare their vegetation with regard to i) species composition (frequent species, species diversity, endangered and alien species) and ii) the ecological requirements of the respective species. Gamma diversity of vascular plant species was comparable in all habitat types (242 species on wall tops, 212 species on wall verticals and 197 species on rock verticals). Wall verticals had higher beta diversity, but lower alpha diversity than rocks. Remarkable differences were found comparing the diversity of alien species. Whereas alpha and gamma diversities of aliens were higher on both wall habitats, beta diversity of aliens was the highest on rocks. The high floristic heterogeneity of walls is mainly attributable to the large pool of species from the surrounding urbanized landscape (e.g., cultivated ornamental species and synanthropic weeds) that are favoured by high nutrient inputs. In contrast, species characteristic of rocks are mainly substrate specialists. Walls and rocks share the frequent occurrence of ferns, grasses and herbs typical of forest understorey and clearings. Compared with rocks, walls are generally colonized by species requiring higher nutrient content, soil reaction, temperature and moisture. Secondary wall habitats might be suitable for some rare and endangered species, but contrary to rocks their occurrences are only accidental and temporary. The representation of aliens was considerably higher on walls (approximately 35%) than on rocks (9%)." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/53400c24cc72b62612d9bba1dac25b62> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Some immunological and physiological properties of insulin preparations from a wide range of vertebrate and invertebrate species have been compared with those of crystalline ox and cod insulin, and the yields of insulin from several of these islet preparations are given. — Highly potent guinea pig and horse antisera to ox insulin were unable to provoke hyperglycaemia in the marine TeleostCottus scorpius (the sculpin) and in the CyclostomeMyxine glutinosa (the hagfish), respectively. — Crystalline ox and cod insulin provoked hypoglycaemia and death in both the sculpin and the hagfish, but only after large doses and several days' observation time. These findings contrast with the ease and fair rapidity of eliciting a hypoglycaemic response in the hagfish when the hagfish's own insulin was used. No marked quantitative differences were noted between the effects of ox, cod, and sculpin insulins in the sculpin, neither between ox and cod insulin in the hagfish. — The results indicate a species-specificity of insulin, both immunologically and hormonally." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/522e353654601494770160c88f082eda> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The endozoochorous and epizoochorous dispersal of vascular plant species by roe deer (Capreolus capreolus) and wild boar (Sus scrofa) was investigated in forest areas of Schleswig-Holstein and Lower Saxony, Germany. The primary aim of this study was to learn about which plant species and in what numbers diaspores are dispersed by the two wild ungulate species. In particular, the significance of zoochory for species composition and biodiversity of forests was evaluated. Fresh faecal pellets were collected from April–November 2001 in the forests of the two study areas. In addition, the coats and hooves of shot roe deer and wild boar were brushed out. The number of viable seeds was determined by greenhouse germination (seedling emergence method). The samples were spread in trays over sterilized soil from the study forests and were kept under controlled conditions in the greenhouse for 12 months. A total of 2,473 individuals from 77 vascular plant species were recorded. While roe deer exceeded wild boar concerning seed contents in the faeces, the significance of roe deer for epizoochorous dispersal was relatively low compared with wild boar. An analysis of the habitat preference of the vascular plant species dispersed by the two ungulate species revealed a high proportion of species growing in forests as well as in the open landscape, and also of non-forest species, while woody plants and herbaceous species closely tied to forest habitats were severely underrepresented. We also discuss consequences for forest ecology and nature conservation." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/0046d45e2edcd2a88241aafcbad7e924> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Plants on infertile soils exhibit physiological and morphological traits that support conservative internal nutrient cycling. However, potential trade-offs among use efficiencies for N, P, and cations are not well explored in species-rich habitats where multiple elements may limit plant production. We examined uptake efficiency and use efficiency of N, P, K, Ca, Mg, Al, and Na in plots of regenerating tropical dry forests spanning a gradient of soil fertility. Our aim was to determine whether plant responses to multiple elements are correlated, or whether there are trade-offs among exploitation strategies across stands varying in community composition, soil quality, and successional stage. For all elements, both uptake efficiency and use efficiency decreased as availability of the corresponding element increased. Plant responses to N, Na, and Al were uncoupled from uptake and use efficiencies for P and essential base cations, which were tightly correlated. N and P use efficiencies were associated with shifts in plant species composition along the soil fertility gradient, and there was also a trend towards increasing N use efficiency with stand age. N uptake efficiency was positively correlated with the abundance of tree species that associate with ectomycorrhizal fungi. Taken together, our results suggest that successional processes and local species composition interact to regulate plant responses to availability of multiple resources. Successional tropical dry forests appear to employ different strategies to maximize response to N vs. P and K." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/96302b5c4cd8303950f48a4cc79c62a8> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract. The foraging activity of Constrictotermes cyphergaster was investigated in the Caatinga of Northeast Brazil. Eight colonies were monitored for seven days, during both dry and wet seasons. Foraging activity occurred in exposed columns at night, generally between 22:00 and 05:00 h. During the wet season, foraging activity was significantly higher, with one bout every 1.6  ±  0.2 days, than the dry season, when foraging bouts were performed every 1.9 ±  0.3 days. Foraging activity throughout the study colonies presented high temporal synchronization. In both seasons, foraging was negatively correlated with air temperature and positively correlated with humidity. The foraging trails were often re-utilized and ranged from 1 to 18.5 meters in length. No difference between seasons in the area potentially utilized by the study colonies was observed. Approximately 51000 individuals participated in the foraging bout during the dry season, whereas some 87000 individuals participated in the foraging bout during the wet season. This corresponds to 43 and 74% of the estimated total nest population for the dry and wet seasons respectively. The average ratio soldiers:workers during foraging was 1:1.2 in the dry season and 1:2 in the wet season. The higher frequency and number of individuals foraging during the wet season in the present study are likely to be a strategy from C. cyphergaster to store energy reserves to be utilized during the dry season." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/3d0a7c0d7d87ac3ecdcd1c5706dfd9af> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The breeding system of Eichhornia azurea (Pontederiaceae) has been described as being both self- and heteromorphic incompatible based on crossing experiments performed on plants grown in an experimental garden. We studied the breeding system of tristylous E. azurea population under natural conditions in the Pantanal wetlands, Brazil. Controlled pollinations were conducted using 35 individuals of each floral morph. Legitimate pollinations produced more fruits than self- and illegitimate pollinations, except for the mid-styled morph which was highly self- and heteromorphic compatible. The number of seeds per fruit was higher under legitimate pollinations than in the other treatments, but self- and illegitimate pollinations produced more fruits and seeds in the Pantanal than for individuals of E. azurea in other populations. The higher fruit and seed production resulting from legitimate pollinations corroborate previous studies, but self-compatibility of mid-styled plants was not previously reported. Overall results indicate a partially self- and heteromorphic compatible system for this species in the Pantanal." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9860132f693a3034a1ec8da7677f89f6> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The basic functional characteristics of spiking neurones are remarkably similar throughout the animal kingdom. Their core design and function features were presumably established very early in their evolutionary history. Identifying the selection pressures that drove animals to evolve spiking neurones could help us interpret their design and function today. This paper provides a quantitative argument, based on ecology, that animals evolved neurones after they started eating each other, about 550 million years ago. We consider neurones as devices that aid an animal’s foraging performance, but incur an energetic cost. We introduce an idealised stochastic model ecosystem of animals and their food, and obtain an analytic expression for the probability that an animal with a neurone will fix in a neurone-less population. Analysis of the fixation probability reveals two key results. First, a neurone will never fix if an animal forages low-value food at high density, even if that neurone incurs no cost. Second, a neurone will fix with high probability if an animal is foraging high-value food at low density, even if that neurone is expensive. These observations indicate that the transition from neurone-less to neurone-armed animals can be facilitated by a transition from filter-feeding or substrate grazing to episodic feeding strategies such as animal-on-animal predation (macrophagy)." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/1f9849c6c1b8da8863dddf62072b9c07> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Borrelia anserina localization and densities were studied over a 60-day period in 800 pairs of recently molted adult Argas (Persicargas) persicus, A. (P.) arboreus, A. (P.) streptopelia, and A. (A.) hermanni (200 pairs of each species) which were infected in this stage by feeding on infected chickens. There were no significant differences in data from males and females of the same tick species. Spirochetes in the gut lumen of each species were numerous on the day of feeding on the infected chickens. The spirochetes greatly decreased in numbers during the next 7 days in A. (P.) persicus and arboreus, and A. (A.) hermanni, and all were immobile by day 15–20 and dead after day 20. In A. (P.) streptopelia, all spirochetes disappeared from the gut lumen by day 7 or 8. Spirochetes penetrated the gut wall and were observed in the hemolymph of each species 2 h after the infective feeding. In the hemolymph, numbers increased for 7 days after A. (P.) persicus and arboreus had fed but for only 2 days after A. (P.) streptopelia and A. (A.) hermanni fed. Numbers afterward varied greatly in A. (P.) persicus and arboreus but dropped to 0 on day 4 and afterward in A. (A.) hermanni and (with a single exception) in A. (P.) streptopelia. Spirochetes were first seen in other tissues on day 7. The central nerve mass was the most heavily infected tissue in A. (P.) persicus and arboreus, and remained infected throughout the 60-day observation period, but was only slightly infected in A. (P.) streptopelia and A. (A.) hermanni. Salivary gland infections were heavy to day 60 in A. (O.) persicus and arboreus, irregular (slight or nil) in A. (A.) hermanni, and nil in A. (P.) streptopelia. Infections in ovaries and testes were heavy to day 60 in A. (P.) persicus and arboreus but nil in A. (P.) streptopelia and A. (A.) hermanni. Infections in Gene's organ of A. (P.) persicus and arboreus were at about the same levels or lower than those in the ovaries. Malphighian tubule infections were rare in each species. The implications of these findings are discussed in the second part of this series." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d752f97e4a7cb6d2a856eabdb243a20a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Dendroica kirtlandii ). This particular recovery program actually began before passage of the federal ESA, when biologists alerted the Michigan Department of Natural Resources of the perilously low population of this bird, which only breeds under jack pine (Pinus banksiana) trees in Michigan. By the time an ESA Recovery Team was formed for this bird in 1975 (the first such team created under the ESA), a legacy of consensus and interagency cooperation was well established. This has led to successful efforts at habitat management and control of its nest parasite, the brown-headed cowbird (Molothrus ater). While the Kirtland's warbler is not yet recovered, its population is near an all-time high, and its recovery is possible within the next decade. When (and if) this happens, it will be clearly attributable to this successful model of federalism for natural resources management." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b5a7ba1d4979d1b3c603c1f459ae4e50> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The habitat quality of Chub mackerel (Scomber japonicus) in the East China Sea has been a subject of concern in the last 10 years due to large fluctuations in annual catches of this stock. For example, the Chinese light-purse seine fishery recorded 84000 tons in 1999 compared to 17000 tons in 2006. The fluctuations have been attributed to variability in habitat quality. The habitat suitability Index (HSI) has been widely used to describe fish habitat quality and in fishing ground forecasting. In this paper we use catch data and satellite derived environmental variables to determine habitat suitability indices for Chub mackerel during July to September in the East China Sea. More than 90% of the total catch was found to come from the areas with sea surface temperature of 28.0°–29.4°C, sea surface salinity of 33.6–34.2 psu, chlorophyll-a concentration of 0.15–0.50 mg/m3 and sea surface height anomaly of −0.1–1.1 m. Of the four conventional models of HSI, the Arithmetic Mean Model (AMM) was found to be most suitable according to Akaike Information Criterion analysis. Based on the estimation of AMM in 2004, the monthly HSIs in the waters of 123°–125°E and 27°30′–28°00′ N were more than 0.6 during July to September, which coincides with the catch distribution in the same time period. This implies that AMM can yield a reliable prediction of the Chub mackerel’s habitat in the East China Sea." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/89c76e729d83a401454055c5a8b3eae7> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Biotic assemblages are said to be nested when the species making up relatively species-poor biotas comprise subsets of the species present at richer sites. Because species number and site area are often correlated, previous studies have suggested that nestedness may be relevant to questions of how habitat subdivision affects species diversity, particularly with respect to the question of whether a single large, contiguous patch of habitat will generally contain more species than collections of smaller patches having the same total combined area. However, inferences from analyses of nestedness are complicated by (1) variability in degrees of nestedness measured in natural communities, (2) variability in species-area relationships, and (3) the fact that nestedness statistics do not account for the size of habitat patches, only in the degree of overlap among sites with different numbers of species. By comparing various indices of nestedness with a “saturation index” that more directly measures the effect of habitat subdivision, it is shown that the first two of these factors are not as important as the third. Whether a single large site or several smaller ones having the same total combined area maximizes species diversity is dependent on (1) overlap in species composition among sites and (2) the number of species per unit area in the different sites. Because nestedness indices do not account for species number at a site, they cannot accurately predict how habitat subdivision affects species diversity patterns. Still, nestedness analyses are important in that they indicate the degree to which rare species tend to be found in the largest, or the most species-rich, sites, patterns not revealed by the saturation index. Both types of analysis are important in order to obtain a more complete picture of how species richness and compositional patterns are influenced by habitat subdivision." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8681d24fae8302930ac4b2bccacddf83> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The present study aimed to investigate ecosystem dynamics in Tokyo Bay, a semi-enclosed bay surrounded by the Tokyo metropolitan area in Japan, which is one of the largest and most populous industrialized areas in the world. The bay has been subject to eutrophication since the 1960s, and excessive increase in phytoplankton biomass has led to hypoxia. Ecopath with Ecosim was used to simulate the phytoplankton dynamics, and it could closely reproduce the observed relative biomass. To evaluate the impacts of phytoplankton dynamics, hypoxia, and fishing on the dynamics, with a focus on high trophic levels (up to fish), 3 scenarios, “Yearly constant phytoplankton biomass,” “No hypoxia,” and “No fishing,” were tested. Comparisons with the “Control” scenario without any modifications suggested that (1) the dynamics was controlled by phytoplankton (bottom-up control), (2) hypoxia did not have a serious effect on the past dynamics, and (3) stopping fishing would not contribute to recover of the biomass of exploited fish. Predictions for future dynamics under the scenarios “DO deteriorated” and “DO unchanged” suggest that if DO deteriorates strongly enough to decrease the survival of most benthos, the ecosystem might undergo a non-negligible transformation through extinction or biomass decrease of some benthos." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8a0c55f3a6525f07b564588516888870> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract This study presents observations on the anatomical, palynological and ecological features of Tulipa gumusanica Terzioğlu and its morphologically similar relative, T. armena Boiss. var. armena, in order to clarify their similarities and differences. We found that these taxa have some important differences with regard to anatomical, palynological and ecological features, as well as morphological traits. General anatomical traits of both examined taxa are similar, both having isolateral leaves with distinct hypodermis and a stem with distinct monolayer collenchyma close to the epidermis. However, some anatomical characters such as mesophyll width, average number of stomata on lower epidermis, and epidermal cells on upper epidermis are found to be important in delimiting these taxa. In addition, considerable differences have been observed in pollen shape and size. The species differ ecologically in that T. gumusanica prefers slightly acidic soil with low organic content in the woodland, whereas T. armena var. armena prefers slightly alkali soil with high organic content in steppe vegetation." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4b9dcdf26c27cfdceec4f82e7c8e00a3> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary 1. The uptake of heavy metals via the alimentary tract can be an important factor for the metal budget of fish. 2. Concepts such as biomagnification, bioaccumulation, biotransference, or concentration factors, convey little information about the real threat originating from heavy metals in an aquatic food chain. 3. In polluted aquatic ecosystems the transfer of metals through food chains can be high enough to bring about harmful concentrations in the tissues of fish. This relationship is called the food chain effect. 4. Two kinds of ecological factors influence the food chain effect: firstly, high levels of contamination of the food, and, secondly, the reduction of species diversity. When susceptible species are eliminated, metal-tolerant food organisms may become dominant. Their tolerance may be based either on their ability to accumulate excessive amounts of metals or to exclude heavy metals from the tissues. These two strategies represent feedback mechanisms which may enhance or weaken the food chain effect. 5. It is concluded that future investigations on transference of heavy metals to fish must take into more careful consideration the specific ecological situation of a given environment." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4ab972ee9675ad26cecbbd9a1789b4e8> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract This study investigated association between solitary orb-weaving spiders and a colonial orb-weaving spider, Metepeira incrassata (Araneae: Araneidae). Spiders were sampled along transects and an index of species association showed that two of the species were associated more frequently than expected based on a null hipothesis of random co-occurrence. The potential advantages of mixed-species association were investigated by comparing prey-capture success of one of these associates, Nephila clavipes (Araneae: Tetragnathidae), when it occurs alone, in single-species groups, and when associated with M. incrassata colonies. Field observations of prey-capture success by all three of these categories of N. clavipes revealed that individuals in M. incrassata colonies captured significantly more prey than solitaries or individuals in single-species groups. The increase in prey capture by N. clavipes in M. incrassata colonies may result from utilization of a foraging niche which intercepts a diffirent spectrum of prey than that available to single-species groups or solitaries. Related to this enhanced prey consumption is greater fecundity of spiders in association with M. incrassata as compared to solitaries or individuals in single-species groups." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/75b31fc0ab6edf72b7058fdb9f687a1b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The population ecology of Phyllotreta cruciferae Goeze, a flea beetle which is an important pest of cole crops (Brassica oleracea) in central New York was studied in experimental gardens of differing vegetational diversity over a three year period. Adult beetles were more abundant on collards (B. oleracea var. acephala) grown in monocultures than on those grown adjacent to natural vegetation. The emergence of individuals forming the new annual generation was also greater in the pure stands. Predators and parasites appeared to have a negligible influence on the adult beetles in both habitats. Further experiments demonstrated that monocultures were colonized more rapidly and experienced greater feeding damage than stands in which collards had been interplanted with tomatoes and tobacco. Choice experiments in the laboratory showed that chemical stimuli given off by non-host plants (tomato, Lycopersicon esculentum, and ragweed, Ambrosia artemisiifolia) interfered with the host finding and feeding behaviour of P. cruciferae. These results indicate that vegetational diversity can exert a direct influence on populations of phytophagous insects. We conclude that the environmental capacity (Determination in Schwerdtfeger's terminology) of diverse natural communities is lower than that of natural or man-made monocultures. The “associational resistance” resulting from the higher taxonomic and microclimatic complexity of natural vegetation tends to reduce outbreaks of herbivores in diverse communities." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e5e3a7440a2e1aea048e08af3b7f7a9e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Four species of understory antbirds (Formicariidae: Myrmotherula fulviventris, M. axillaris, Microrhopias quixensis, and Thamnophilus punctatus) had stable populations over eight rainy seasons on Barro Colorado Island, Panama. The co-defended territories of M. fulviventris and Microrhopias quixensis, were essentially identical from year to year on our intensive study site, despite a moderate turnover of territory owners. The location of the territories of T. punctatus was also similar between years. This stability occurred in the face of considerable annual variation in the survivorship of adult M. fulviventris and T. punctatus. This variation was not significantly correlated with patterns of rainfall. Stable territoriality has rarely been reported from relatively-short-lived insectivorous birds. The annual production of young was significantly variable only in M. axillaris. Because BCI is an island comprised of one habitat (tropical forest) and so supports a closed population of antbirds, and because it is unlikely that natality equaled mortality on our study site during the entire eight years of the study, we suggest that these breeding populations are socially regulated at a constant level below the limits directly set by food supply." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/7e7e11d8d714172298dc69dd54bec7f1> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Daily commercial catches, school sizes and school densities of larval anchovy, and oceanographic and meteorological variables for the fishing seasons (January to June) from 1988 to 1990 were analyzed by means of principal component analysis to identify causative factors for the aggregation and abundance of larval anchovy, which make up the grounds in the coastal waters of southwest Taiwan. The results suggested that the primary factors associated with the formation of fishing grounds were surface water temperature that related to the occurrence of Engraulis japonicus, surface water salinity that was affected by influex of offshore water and river discharge, and phosphate content and solar radiation that affected plankton production." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/3336618dc1c874a27718d2bfaf9393b7> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Larval transport between Johnston Atoll and the Hawaiian Archipelago was examined using computer simulation and high-resolution ocean current data. The effects of pelagic larval duration and spawning seasonality on long-distance transport and local retention were examined using a Lagrangian, individual-based approach. Retention around Johnston Atoll appeared to be low, and there appeared to be seasonal effects on both retention and dispersal. Potential larval transport corridors between Johnston Atoll and the Hawaiian Archipelago were charted. One corridor connects Johnston Atoll with the middle portion of the Hawaiian Archipelago in the vicinity of French Frigate Shoals. Another corridor connects Johnston Atoll with the lower inhabited islands in the vicinity of Kauai. Transport appears to be related to the subtropical countercurrent and the Hawaiian Lee countercurrent, both located to the west of the archipelago and flowing to the east. A new analytical tool, termed CONREC–IRC is presented for the quantification of spatial patterns." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8e5101f4f456fc227a40f78c0d826e26> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Eight flavonol glycosides were detected in the three species of theFagonia sinaica complex. They were fully characterized as the 3-glucosides of kaempferol, quercetin and isorhamnetin, 3-rutinoside of quercetin and 3,7-diglucoside of quercetin and isorhamnetin. Two additional glycosides were partially characterized as a kaempferol 3,7-diglycoside and quercetin 3-diglycoside." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/898d853976faa4eaecf83d5a987c16cb> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Reproductive behaviour of clonal plants might change in contrasting habitats. In field and simulated experiments, we studied the relative importance of sexual reproduction and clonal propagation in rhizomatous herb, Iris japonica Thunb. in two forest habitats (BF, bamboo forest and OAFE, open area of forest edge), and effects of population origin (BF vs. OAFE) and environmental effects (shading) on sexual vs. clonal reproduction. In field experiment, the relative importance of reproduction in I. japonica populations was different in two habitats, which showed predominantly sexual reproduction in OAFE and clonal propagation in BF. In simulated experiment, the effect of population origin and light treatment (shading) was significant for reproduction of I. japonica. Clonal propagation was only influenced by population origin, and sexual reproduction was determined both by population origin and light treatment. A trade-off between two reproductive modes exhibited in both experiments. The trade-offs was more obvious in OAFE than in BF because sexual reproduction, resource and inter-specific competition obviously lacked in BF. The results indicated that the selective forces shaping reproduction of I. japonica in contrasting habitats might demonstrate pronounce adaptive population differentiation among forest habitats. Thus, I. japonica populations formed local differentiation by adaptation of reproduction to local heterogeneous forest habitats." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4866d6d2c45ee2354efd35a5ad0952fb> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Submersed aquatic vegetation (SAV) communities have undergone declines worldwide, exposing them to invasions from non-native species. Over the past decade, the invasive species Hydrilla verticillata has been documented in several tributaries of the lower Chesapeake Bay, Virginia. We used annual aerial mapping surveys from 1998 to 2007, integrated with spatial analyses of water quality data, to analyze the patterns and rates of change of a H. verticillata-dominated SAV community and relate them to varying salinity and light conditions. Periods of declining SAV coverage corresponded to periods where salinities exceeded 7 and early growing season (April to May) Secchi depths were <0.4 m. Increases were driven by the expansion of H. verticillata along with several other species into the upper estuary, where some areas experienced an 80% increase in cover. Field investigations revealed H. verticillata dominance to be limited to the upper estuary where total suspended solid concentrations during the early growing season were <15 mg l−1 and salinity remained <3. The effect of poor early growing season water clarity on annual SAV growth highlights the importance of water quality during this critical life stage. Periods of low clarity combined with periodic salinity intrusions may limit the dominance of H. verticillata in these types of estuarine systems. This study shows the importance of the use of these types of biologically relevant episodic events to supplement seasonal habitat requirements and also provides evidence for the potential important role of invasive species in SAV community recovery." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f5016d17750d1db4cf3007dd82c88f84> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The salt marshes of the Wadden Sea are important wintering areas for some species of granivorous passerines, which have declined considerably since the 1960s. We investigated the habitat choice of all wintering passerines in eight study areas in German salt marshes with special consideration of human impact on these habitats. Granivorous species that almost exclusively winter in salt marshes, Shorelark (Eremophila alpestris), Snow Bunting (Plectrophenax nivalis) and Twite (Carduelis flavirostris) were concentrated in the lower salt marsh vegetation and in the driftlines, while all other species preferred the high upper salt marsh communities, although Rock Pipits (Anthus petrosus littoralis) fed in muddy areas along ditches. Shorelarks switched habitat in conditions where seeds were scarce to feed instead on arthropods in upper salt marshes. Intensively sheep-grazed upper salt marshes resemble lower salt marshes in their vegetation and were therefore mainly visited by Shorelarks, Snow Buntings and Twites. In winter, the driftline is preferred by the two former species, while in autumn and spring more birds foraged in the salt marshes. Twites prefer to feed mainly on seeds of Salicornia. Areas with S. europaea are visited mainly in late autumn and early winter, while areas with S. stricta are used throughout the winter because of a steady supply of seeds. Several years after embankment, polders are hardly used any more by the lower salt marsh species as the habitat changes into freshwater marshes. Large embankment projects since the early 1960s have included salt marshes and intertidal flats, and the resultant loss of habitat is responsible for the decline of lower salt marsh species. For other passerine species the effects of reclamation are unknown. The effects of intensified grazing on the wintering populations of Shorelark, Snow Bunting and Twite are still unresolved. Although grazing supports lower salt marsh vegetation, the seed production per plant is much lower there and some important seed producers hardly occur. Since grazing was reduced and embankment projects have been stopped, the salt marsh areas (especially lower salt marshes) have increased and so have the wintering populations of Shorelark, Snow Bunting and Twite. For the other species, the consequences of habitat changes are unknown, although it is suggested that reduced grazing will support them. Reducing the human impact on salt marshes will, in the long run, probably lead to a natural salt marsh with much variety in elevation and in its corresponding vegetation and bird communities. Meanwhile, management by grazing might be required in parts of the salt marshes." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4b54a0bf3d4b6e7615ae23d42b65506f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Although scientific knowledge about the biodiversity of Antarctic benthic hydrozoans has considerably increased in recent years, little is known about their spatial distribution and underpinning factors. Trying to contribute to filling this gap, benthic hydroid spatial distribution in the Bellingshausen Sea (Southern Ocean) was studied. Samples were collected at 32 stations at depths between 86 and 3,304 m during Spanish Antarctic expeditions in 2003 and 2006. Sediments and bottom water properties were analyzed using an USNEL-type box corer and a Neil Brown Instrument System Mark III CTD, respectively. Forty species were reported (Acryptolaria sp., Stegopoma plicatile, Staurotheca dichotoma having the highest percentages of occurrence), representing ca. 19 % of the species richness of the known benthic hydroid fauna of the Southern Ocean. Three well-defined assemblages (shallow, deep and transitional) were established based on significant differences in species occurrence. Benthic hydroid spatial distribution in the Bellingshausen Sea seems to be controlled mainly by depth and substrate (most hydrozoan species are epibiotic), by species dispersal abilities and by species resilience to changing hydrodynamic conditions. The level of species richness found in the present study, compared with other Antarctic areas, gives support to arguments stated by authors against the idea that the Bellingshausen Sea is “a benthos desert” controlled by oligotrophic conditions and intense iceberg traffic." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e9905b2b75836901f837f4fea8f0b1b0> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Stable carbon isotope analysis was evaluated as a means of predicting the relative proportions of C3 and C4 root phytomass in species mixtures. The following mixtures of C3 and C4 species were used: 1) big bluestem (Andropogon gerardii)/cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum), 2) little bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium)/cheatgrass, and 3) sorghum (Sorghum bicolor)/sunflower (Helianthus annuus). There was a significant correlation (P<0.01) between % C4 phytomass and stable carbon isotope values for each of the three combinations (r 2>0.98). Root length per mass varied among the five species studied (10.1–94.3 m/g), which resulted in different conclusions depending on whether root values are expressed as length or mass. For example, field samples from a tallgrass prairie site were estimated to contain about 20% cheatgrass on a mass basis, whereas the figure was 68% when expressed in terms of length. The combination of stable carbon isotope analysis with length-for-mass measurements promises to be a useful means of studying root competition between C3 and C4 plants." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e6481038ab66aff6fa56562b56ad3b15> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Ten wheat production sites of Pakistan were categorized into four climatic zones i.e. arid, semi-arid, sub-humid and humid to explore the vulnerability of wheat production in these zones to climate change using CSM-Cropsim-CERES-Wheat model. The analysis was based on multi-year (1971–2000) crop model simulation runs using daily weather series under scenarios of increased temperature and atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration (CO2) along with two scenarios of water management. Apart from this, sowing date as an adaptation option to offset the likely impacts of climate change was also considered. Increase in temperature resulted in yield declines in arid, semi-arid and sub-humid zone. But the humid zone followed a positive trend of gain in yield with rise in temperature up to 4°C. Within a water regime, increase in CO2 concentration from 375 to 550 and 700 ppm will exert positive effect on gain in wheat yield but this positive effect is significantly variable in different climatic zones under rainfed conditions than the full irrigation. The highest response was shown by arid zone followed by semi-arid, sub-humid and humid zones. But if the current baseline water regimes (i.e. full irrigation in arid and semi-arid zones and rainfed in sub-humid and humid zones) persist in future, the sub-humid zone will be most benefited in terms of significantly higher percent gain in yield by increasing CO2 level, mainly because of its rainfed water regime. Within a CO2 level the changes in water supply from rainfed to full irrigation shows an intense degree of responsiveness in terms of yield gain at 375 ppm CO2 level compared to 550 and 700 ppm. Arid and semi-arid zones were more responsive compared to sub-humid and humid zones. Rise in temperature reduced the length of crop life cycle in all areas, though at an accelerated rate in the humid zone. These results revealed that the climatic zones have shown a variable intensity of vulnerability to different scenarios of climate change and water management due to their inherent specific and spatial climatic features. In order to cope with the negative effects of climate change, alteration in sowing date towards cooler months will be an appropriate response by the farmers." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/42bc4e6be49f17d51adb2cffbcd87c79> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The responses of Polygonum pensylvanicum L., an early successional annual, and of Polygonum virginianum L., a late successional perennial, were examined along discontinuous gradients of soil moisture, light and nutrient availability. In the case of P. virginianum both individuals grown from seed and individuals grown from rhizomes were examined. The results show that variation in the response of individuals of a species of different age to environmental variation is as great as that found between the two congeneric species of different successional habitats. In general, individuals of the two species were more similar to one another in response to the resource gradients when both were started from seed, than were individuals of P. virginianum grown from seed and from rhizomes. Potential differences in stored reserves (starting capital) between rhizomes and seeds appeared to have little effect upon responses to resource availability. A number of plant characters were found to vary along the gradients in ways that were unique to the character, the gradient, and the age of the individual. These characters included aspects of leaf size, shape, and orientation, as well as whole plant architecture. Many if not all of these characters are likely to have significant effects upon the functioning of plants. The origin of this difference in response to the gradients of individuals of P. virginianum of differing age may be ontogenetic or may reflect differences in genetic composition created by recombination." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/1b59f0e18de3946e36b2de1f14596882> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract When facing decisions about where to live, juveniles have a strong tendency to choose habitats similar to where their parents successfully bred. Developing larval fishes can imprint on the chemical cues from their natal habitat. However, to demonstrate that imprinting is ecologically important, it must be shown that settlers respond and distinguish among different imprinted cues, and use imprinting for decisions in natural environments. In addition, the potential role innate preferences play compared to imprinted choices also needs to be examined. As environmental variability increases due to anthropogenic causes these two recognition mechanisms, innate and imprinting, could provide conflicting information. Here we used laboratory rearing and chemical choice experiments to test imprinting in larval anemonefish (Amphiprion percula). Individuals exposed to a variety of benthic habitat or novel olfactory cues as larvae either developed a preference for (spent >50 % of their time in the cue) or increased their attraction to (increased preference but did not spend >50 % of their time in the cue) the cue when re-exposed as settlers. Results indicate not only the capacity for imprinting but also the ability to adjust innate preferences after early exposure to a chemical cue. To test ecological relevance in the natural system, recruits were collected from anemones and related to their parents, using genetic parentage analysis, providing information on the natal anemone species and the species chosen at settlement. Results demonstrated that recruits did not preferentially return to their natal species, conflicting with laboratory results indicating the importance imprinting might have in habitat recognition." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9aa395d84306f8434eb548ddd35bafe2> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The behaviour of adultHomoeusa acuminata on trails of its hostLasius fuliginosus was investigated both in the field and in the laboratory. The beetles were active from May to September, accurately following the foraging trails of their hosts up to 20 metres from the nest. Most of the time, they were ignored by the ants, but if attacked they raised their abdomen as a possible appeasement or defensive behaviour. On trails the beetles most probably act as food robbers, feeding on prey collected by ants. The following method, called stowaway behaviour, was used by the beetles: when a beetle encountered an ant carrying a prey back to the nest it jumped on the prey, probably feeding on it while being transported. Laboratory experiments on circular artificial trails demonstrated thatH. acuminata follows a water extract of hindguts of the ants, the source of the trail pheromone. Both beetles and ants responded to an artificial trail of 0.03 hindgut equivalent per cm, but the mean distance followed by the beetles was about twelve times higher than that covered by the ants themselves. In contrast, experiments with solutions of the six fatty acids reported as the active components of the trail pheromone showed that the beetles did not respond at all, and that the ants only respond to the fatty acids at a very high concentration." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/05934212e243d45039c3cf015fb11aa4> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Recipients of Darwin Medals from the International Society of Reef Studies are requested to write an overview of the work that led to their award. This account is a personal perspective of thirty-five years work on corals. The fields of taxonomy, biogeography, palaeontology, molecular biology, and evolution are presented in an historical context. Emphasis is given to the changing relevance of these fields to today’s world of information technology and the ever-increasing conservation needs." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2a2442136a4f9a6b990180f86d57bc2f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Eucalyptus urophylla (Timor mountain gum) is an economically important plantation species that occurs naturally in a series of disjunct populations on the volcanic slopes of seven islands in eastern Indonesia. Twelve microsatellite markers were used to investigate the distribution of nuclear genetic diversity among 19 geographically defined E. urophylla populations. High levels of gene diversity were observed throughout the geographic range (H E = 0.703 to 0.776). The level of genetic differentiation among populations was low (F ST = 0.031), but the amount of differentiation increased with geographic distance. A phenogram produced by a neighbor-joining analysis illustrated that populations clustered according to islands. However, a Bayesian clustering approach revealed a more cryptic population structure comprising two genetically homogeneous groups. Gene flow among the populations is likely responsible for the apparent weak influence of geographic insularity on the genetic diversity and structure of the island species. These findings provide direction for conservation and breeding strategies in E. urophylla." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/dc01cf8ca1a81ee7e6d23339d362eaac> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The patterns of tree-related stress research depended on their cultivation status and were statistically highly significant in all analyses. Non-cultivated tree species were studied more, cited more often, by authors from differing countries, with emphasis on different tree processes, stress types and research areas, and published in different journals. From 2001–2014, 4128 articles in 586 different academic journals dealt with tree stress. A majority of journals published stress-related research either on cultivated or on non-cultivated tree species. The articles were averagely cited 17 times, the five dominant journals being Acta Horticulturae, Tree Physiology, Trees—Structure and Function, Forest Ecology and Management and PLoS ONE. Research was published by authors from 109 countries, authors from China, USA, Spain, Brazil and Italy being the most productive. International collaboration was present in 21 % of the articles. A total of 1141 tree species were studied from 366 genera. The dominant species studied were Olea europaea, Malus x domestica, Pinus sylvestris, Prunus persica, Picea abies. Around ¾ of the articles were single species studies. Water stress, followed by drought stress, salt stress, abiotic stress, and environmental stress were the most studied types with over 90 % articles dealing with a single stress type. Physiological and ecophysiological research of trees exposed to stress dominated, followed by molecular biology and biochemistry, genetics, ecology. Tree growth was the most studied process/activity, followed by photosynthesis, gene expression, stomatal conductance and water status. An increase in “-omics” type research was observed in recent years in cultivated tree research." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e7346919ef4b5c45c8e55fb69a2697e3> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary 1.Oxygen consumption, undulation frequency, and tether force as an index to power output were measured in tethered, swimming marine iguanas.2.Power output increased linearly with total oxygen consumption and mass-specific oxygen consumption increased linearly with undulation frequency (Figs. 1 and 2).3.Velocity of free swimming iguanas is a linear function of undulation frequency and of total length (Fig. 3), which allows calculation of the equivalent velocity for tethered iguanas undulating in place on a tether.4.Cost of transport for swimming iguanas decreases as body mass increases, and can be predicted from the equation ml O2/kg·m=0.31M −0.56, whereM is mass in kg (Fig. 4).5.The change in cost of transport with body mass correlates with foraging patterns of different size classes of marine iguanas. Small marine iguanas feed on algae on or near shore while adults obtain algae by swimming offshore and diving.6.Cost of transport during swimming in marine iguanas is higher than for fish and turtles but lower than for ducks or humans (Fig. 5)." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9c7ddc963117a9ac1ae9fca448dc5f6d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Eumetazoan parasites in fish larvae normally exhibit large body sizes relative to their hosts. This observation raises a question about the potential effects that parasites might have on small fish. We indirectly evaluated this question using energetic metabolic laws based on body volume and the parasite densities. We compared the biovolume as well as the numeric and volumetric densities of parasites over the host body volume of larval and juvenile-adult fish and the average of these parasitological descriptors for castrator parasites and the parasites found in the fish studied here. We collected 5266 fish larvae using nearshore zooplankton sampling and 1556 juveniles and adult fish from intertidal rocky pools in central Chile. We considered only the parasitized hosts: 482 fish larvae and 629 juvenile-adult fish. We obtained 31 fish species; 14 species were in both plankton and intertidal zones. Fish larvae exhibited a significantly smaller biovolume but larger numeric and volumetric densities of parasites than juvenile-adult fish. Therefore, fish larvae showed a large proportion of parasite biovolume per unit of body host (cm3). However, the general scaling of parasitological descriptors and host body volume were similar between larvae and juvenile-adult fish. The ratio between the biovolume of parasites and the host body volume in fish larvae was similar to the proportion observed in castrator parasites. Furthermore, the ratios were different from those of juvenile-adult fish, which suggests that the presence of parasites implies a high energetic cost for fish larvae that would diminish the fitness of these small hosts." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ff600ccdc3aa5dd659d55987384b483a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Identifying fixed bed roughness scales of hydrodynamic relevance to waves and currents is challenging around coral reefs due to their highly inhomogeneous bathymetry. In order to characterize the spatial variability in reef roughness, a quantitative analysis of high-resolution sidescan sonar backscatter is performed for the identification of distinct substrates around a tropical reef and is related to echo sounder-based roughness measurements. Data were collected in the vicinity of the Kilo Nalu Observatory on the south shore of Oahu using sidescan sonar and a narrow beam echo sounder incorporated in a REMUS-100 (Remote Environmental Monitoring UnitS) autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV). With basic statistics and principal component analysis of variables derived from the backscatter data, it is possible to discriminate between areas of rough reef, bare reef, and rippled sand. Echo sounder-derived spectral analysis did not reveal dominant length scales. However, by combining the seabed classification obtained from sidescan measurements with echo sounder data, spectral root mean square (RMS) height values of approximately 3.3 cm and 7.3 cm are assigned to the bare reef and rough reef areas, respectively, for roughness with wavelengths between 0.2 and 6 m." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b6e6aad448cacdf9f8822290c43d74d9> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Based on the eddy covariance measurements from June 2011 to December 2013, the seasonal variations and the controls of water and CO2 fluxes were investigated over an alpine meadow in Lijiang, southwest China. The year 2012 had the largest total precipitation among years from 2011 to 2013 (1037.9, 1190.4, and 1066.1 mm, respectively). A spring drought event occurred from March to May 2012, and the peak normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) in 2012 was the lowest. Throughout the whole year, net radiation (R n), vapor pressure deficit, and air temperature (T a) were the primary controls on evapotranspiration (ET), and R n is the most important factor. The influence of R n on ET was much more in the wet season (R 2 = 0.93) than in the dry season (R 2 = 0.28). In the wet season, the ratio of ET to equilibrium ET (ETeq) (0.92 ± 0.14; mean ± S.D.) did not show a clear seasonal pattern with NDVI when the soil water content (SWC) was usually more than 0.25 m3 m−3, indicating that ET could be predicted well by ETeq (or radiation and temperature). On half-hourly and daily scales, photosynthetic active radiation (PAR) and air temperature were the main meteorological factors in determining the net ecosystem production (NEP). The seasonal trends of NEP were closely related with the change of NDVI. The integrated NEP in the 2012 wet season (157.8 g C m−2 year−1) was 19.5 and 23.8 % lower than in the 2011 and 2013 wet season (207.0 and 196.1 g C m−2 year−1). The mean ET/ETeq for each of the wet seasons from 2011 to 2013 was 0.88. The 2012 spring drought and its reduction in NDVI decreased the total NEP significantly but had little effect on the total ET in the wet season. The different response of NEP and ET to the spring drought was attributed to the high SWC and small vapor pressure deficit during the wet season." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2d45ad5f59894d0fefcb6882007555c6> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The endophyte Neotyphodium coenophialum in Schedonorus arundinaceus (tall fescue) may alter host interactions with specific resident species or shift the host’s niche. These effects can be quantified by assessing tall fescue responses to, and effects on, the variation among resident species (selection) and resident species interactions (complementarity). To determine how N. coenophialum affects tall fescue, grassland microcosms containing 16 transplants of two, four, or eight resident species were seeded with endophyte-infected (E+) or endophyte-free (E−) Kentucky-31 (KY-31) tall fescue. All resident species were also grown in monoculture. Aboveground biomass was harvested 9 weeks after tall fescue was added (18 weeks’ total growth). At harvest, more E+ than E− individuals were present and they represented a larger portion of the aboveground biomass across richness treatments, despite similar germination in concurrent trials. Tall fescue individuals were larger in microcosms dominated by more productive resident species (greater selection). In contrast, fewer E−, but not E+, individuals were present in microcosms with more facilitative interactions among the resident species (greater complementarity). E− and E+ tall fescue also affected resident species differently. High-richness E+ microcosms were more diverse and less dominated by productive species (lower selection) than E− microcosms. Thus, E+ KY-31 may more readily establish in, and affect, species-rich, functionally diverse communities as a result of niche shifts during establishment and negative effects on specific resident species. Although results need to be further tested under field conditions, it appears that endophyte presence may only facilitate KY-31 invasion into a limited suite of community types." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d9493a39ac13f1f144e20eff595ec36f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract As elsewhere in the world, bumble bees play a vital role as pollinators in Uruguay, but knowledge on their health status is still limited. Between September 2012 and May 2013, 403 adult individuals of the two species of Bombus known for the country (Bombus atratus, Bombus bellicosus) were collected in six localities. We found that 177 (119 B. atratus, 58 B. bellicosus) were harboring one or two types of pathogens, parasites, or parasitoids. Identification of these natural enemies carried out by morphological or molecular procedures revealed the presence of two species of Microsporidia [Nosema ceranae (prevalence: 18.2 % in B. atratus; 44.9 % in B. bellicosus), Tubulinosema pampeana (prevalence: 13 % in B. atratus)], two species of Nematoda [Sphaerularia bombi (prevalence: 40.4 % in B. atratus; 40 % in B. bellicosus) and an unidentified Mermithidae (prevalence: 0.8 % in B. bellicosus)], and one species of Diptera parasitoid (prevalence: 3.2 % in B. atratus; 4.2 % in B. bellicosus). Except N. ceranae, none of the other species have been previously reported in Uruguay." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/319252ff8d7d6f5fa816f053a32c8cba> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract From April 1996 to October 1997, regular samplings were carried out monthly at 8 stations in a macrophytic basin of Baoan Lake. From the water samples, 47 genera, 96 species of ciliata were identified. Stations covered with macrophytes had greater number of ciliate species and higher percentage of sessile species. The mixotrophStrombidium viride bearing algal endosymbionts dominated numerically the whole ciliate communities; most of the other dominants were bactivores. Total ciliate density in Lake Baoan was 6170–34310 ind./L. The seasonal density fluctuations of the dominant species populations were also investigated. Maximum abundances were observed in spring and winter during the decay of macrophytes and minimum densities were observed during the summer months of luxuriant macrophytes growth." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/03b2cb517caa9a23fa1099a7a8bf6d4e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary In continuation of the work, begun by the Deutsches Hydrographisches Institut (DHI) in 1969, concerning the occurrence and the transport of artificial radio isotopes in the North Sea region (Kautsky [1973, 1976]) an intensive measurement programme was carried out, together with the Fisheries Radiobiological Laboratory (FRL) in Lowestoft, from 1974 to 1976. From October 1973 to October 1976, 7 complete and 4 partial radiological surveys of the North Sea were undertaken, including the adjacent sea areas towards the North and the West. During that time a clear increase in the137Cs activity concentration was observed in the region around the Orkney Islands and along the East coast of Scotland. However, the values were only a fraction of the concentrations which would correspond to the dose limits recommended by the International Commission on Radiological Protection (International Atomic Energy Agency [1970], International Commission on Radiological Protection [1979]), and therefore present no danger to aquatic organisms or man. The measurements of the distribution of the137Cs supplied us with further information concerning the watermass transport processes in the North Sea region. The observation that — at least in the surface region — almost all of the water streaming out from the Irish Sea towards the North flows into the North Sea in the region of the Orkney Islands, was of particular interest." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/584b5bd38734fd2035ae665688ad2a4e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract There is concern about the worldwide decline of bees, in which genetic factors may play a role. As populations of these haplodiploid insects suffer habitat fragmentation and subsequent isolation, theory predicts an increase in inbreeding and a concomitant increase in inviable or sterile diploid males, a product of reduced allelic diversity at the sex determining locus, which could lead to a diploid male extinction vortex. To test this idea, we genotyped 1,245 males of one orchid bee, Euglossa cordata, a species with low diploid male production on the mainland. We genotyped bees from the Brazilian mainland and three islands using five highly variable microsatellite loci. Allelic richness was lowest on the most remote island 38 km from the mainland and, though the degree of differentiation across localities was modest (global FST = 0.034; global $${\\text{G}}_{\\text{ST}}^{'} = 0. 1 5 3$$ GST′=0.153 , both P < 0.001) and isolation by distance was weak (Mantel test, r = 0.614, P = 0.056), sea was revealed to be a significant barrier to inferred historic gene flow (partial Mantel test of distance over sea, r = 0.831, P = 0.003). Only seven males were diploid (mean diploid male production, DMP, 0.6 %). Though the proportion of diploid males was highest on the most remote island (1.3 %), differences in DMP across study areas were statistically non-significant. Thus island isolation leads to reduced genetic variation at putatively neutral microsatellite loci, but E. cordata nevertheless seems to maintain allelic diversity at the sex locus, possibly because of sufficient gene flow, or because it is a locus under balancing selection, or because of the joint action of these two evolutionary forces: migration and selection. These and other bee species may be able to maintain sufficient variability at the sex locus to avoid entering the DM extinction vortex, even on relatively isolated islands or habitat fragments." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b0c97d58658d041d336d466bdb510fcc> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The impact of parasites on host population dynamics depends on local abundance of the parasites, which may vary considerably across spatial scales. In sand hopper populations, mermithid parasites have major impacts on host dynamics, which may vary among spatially separated populations due to the sand hopper’s wide, patchy distribution. The present study compared the abundance and biomass of a mermithid parasite (Thaumamermis zealandica Poinar et al., 2002) in sand hoppers (Bellorchestia quoyana (Milne-Edwards)) both within and among disconnected beaches. In addition, several variables were measured and tested as potentially important predictors of the parasite abundance and biomass. It was found that geographic isolation may only be responsible for minor differences in parasite populations compared with other factors. Host size was identified as the most important predictor of mermithid parasite abundance, but epibiont abundance, kelp patch mass and host density were poor predictors of abundance. These factors were also poor predictors of parasite biomass in hosts. This study further supports the notion that studies aiming to elucidate population dynamics or patterns should sample thoroughly across both spatial and temporal scales." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e83207b3988e507644e197725d77b76e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Climate may affect the dynamics of infectious diseases by shifting pathogen, vector, or host species abundance, population dynamics, or community interactions. Black-tailed prairie dogs (Cynomys ludovicianus) are highly susceptible to plague, yet little is known about factors that influence the dynamics of plague epizootics in prairie dogs. We investigated temporal patterns of plague occurrence in black-tailed prairie dogs to assess the generality of links between climate and plague occurrence found in previous analyses of human plague cases. We examined long-term data on climate and plague occurrence in prairie dog colonies within two study areas. Multiple regression analyses revealed that plague occurrence in prairie dogs was not associated with climatic variables in our Colorado study area. In contrast, plague occurrence was strongly associated with climatic variables in our Montana study area. The models with most support included a positive association with precipitation in April–July of the previous year, in addition to a positive association with the number of “warm” days and a negative association with the number of “hot” days in the same year as reported plague events. We conclude that the timing and magnitude of precipitation and temperature may affect plague occurrence in some geographic areas. The best climatic predictors of plague occurrence in prairie dogs within our Montana study area are quite similar to the best climatic predictors of human plague cases in the southwestern United States. This correspondence across regions and species suggests support for a (temperature-modulated) trophic-cascade model for plague, including climatic effects on rodent abundance, flea abundance, and pathogen transmission, at least in regions that experience strong climatic signals." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/7ad4fecf0a3c5fa1d3938c14a2f19fd7> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Globally, temperate grasslands and meadows have sharply declined in spatial extent. Loss and fragmentation of grasslands and meadows may impact biodiversity, carbon storage, energy balance, and climate change. In the Pacific Northwest region of North America, grasslands and meadows have declined in extent over the past century. Largely undocumented in this regional decline are the grass balds of the Oregon Coast Range, isolated grasslands in a landscape dominated by coniferous forests. This study was conducted to quantify the spatial extent and patterns of grass bald change. Five balds in the Oregon Coast Range were evaluated using historical aerial photographs and recent digital orthophoto quadrangles (DOQ). Over the time period of study (1948/1953 to 1994/2000), bald area declined by 66%, primarily from forest encroachment. The number and average size of bald vegetation patches declined, while edge density increased. Tree encroachment into balds was inversely related to distance from nearest potential parent trees. Spatial patterns of bald loss may result from a forest to bald gradient of unfavorable environmental conditions for tree establishment and/or seed dispersal limitation. Species dependent on balds may be at risk from loss of bald area and increased fragmentation, although metrics of habitat fragmentation may not reflect species-specific habitat requirements. Tree encroachment patterns and increased bald edge densities suggest increasing rates of bald loss in the future. The remote sensing nature of this study cannot determine the fundamental causes of bald decline, although prior research suggests climate change, cessation of native burning, successional changes in response to prior wildfires, and cessation of livestock grazing all may have potential influence." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/107bc3a06b529a6fbcf45baa44cc90b2> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Male hybrids obtained by crossing Bombina bombina with Bombina v. variegata displayed calling behavior when treated with hormones at the age of about 12 months. The mating calls of the hybrids are intermediate with respect to rate, duration, inter-call interval, and fundamental frequency between the calls of the two purebred species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8568446bad59c31bd2efd4f64eb802e3> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Arctic charr (Salvelinus alpinus) is generally considered an inferior piscivore compared to brown trout (Salmo trutta). However, we demonstrate that a recently described profundal spawning piscivore PP-morph of Arctic charr in a subarctic lake has evolved typical piscivore traits (i.e. large jaws, robust skulls), similar to the co-occurring brown trout but different from the sympatric littoral spawning omnivore LO-morph of Arctic charr. A few large-sized LO-morph, most large-sized PP-morph and trout constitute the piscivore guild, but they differed in prey fish selection. Of the fish-eating deep-water PP-morph, 52% had consumed charr, with a peak during the polar night period (68–80% in November–January). In contrast, the LO-morph and trout were mainly (~90%) inter-specific piscivores eating stickleback. Consequently, the PP-morph was the main charr predator and started to feed on fish at a smaller size and took larger prey relative to their body length than the trout. Stable isotope (δ13C, δ15N) ratios reflect the dietary specialisations in the upper-water (LO-morph, trout) and the deep-water (PP-morph) environments, besides the piscivorous behaviour of the PP-morph and trout. The existence of a shallow-water piscivore (trout) may explain the origin of this PP-morph, taking benefit of underutilised resources of small-sized Arctic charr in the deep-water habitat." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/dbc149bd5f767762fba7e843f2579ed8> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary At mid-shore levels on rocky shores in New South Wales, grazing gastropods are the dominant species in sheltered areas. Where wave-exposure is great, barnacles occupy most of the space. At intermediate levels of waveexposure, there are mixtures of grazing gastropods and barnacles, and the patterns of occupancy of space, and structure of the community change from time to time. The major species found in these areas are the coronuloid barnacle Tesseropora rosea, the patellid limpet Cellana tramoserica, the smaller acmaeid limpet, Patelloida latistrigata, which is mostly confined amongst barnacles, and the predatory whelk Morula marginalba. The roles of each of these species in determining the structure and persistence of intertidal communities were investigated by experimental manipulations of the densities of each of these organisms. In most experiments, a range of densities of limpets and barnacles was used, rather than the simple removal of all of one species. Recruitment of Cellana was negatively associated with increasing density of adult limpets, and with increasing density of barnacles. Growth and survival of juvenile Cellana were decreased by increasing densities of barnacles, probably because barnacles occupied space, preventing limpets from grazing. Morula had no effect on recruitment or survival of juvenile Cellana. Recruitment of juvenile Patelloida was not affected by different densities of barnacles, but survival to adult sizes was poor in areas where whelks are active. In areas where whelks were removed, Patelloida showed increased survivorship with increased cover of barnacles, probably because Patelloida amongst barnacles found refuge from the superior competitive effects of Cellana. The settlement and subsequent survival of Tesseropora were affected in complex ways by the activities of Cellana. At great densities, Cellana can have deleterious effects on newly-settled barnacles, probably by crushing them whilst grazing. In some areas, and at some densities, however, limpets can have beneficial effects on the recruitment and/or survival of Tesseropora. The limpets graze the juvenile stages of growth of foliose macroalgae, preventing them from growing up to pre-empt the rock-surface (thus preventing settlement of barnacles) or to smother alreadysettled barnacles. The effect of limpets on the recruitment and survival of barnacles in any area is a function of the densities of limpets and barnacles, and the height on the shore and local weather (the latter factors influence the rates of growth of algae). Increased cover of the rock-surface by adult barnacles caused reductions in the densities of Cellana. Limpets migrated away from areas of great cover of barnacles, and, if confined in such areas, starved and lost weight. The dispersion, as well as the density of the barnacles was important in determining the effects of barnacle cover. Where barnacles occupied half the space, but were scattered, leaving only small patches of bare rock, they had the same deleterious effects on Cellana as in areas where they were spread evenly to occupy most of the rock-surface. Thus, barnacles could invade areas dominated by limpets provided they recruited in sufficient numbers. They did not have to saturate an area to displace the Cellana. In these communities, all of the species can be considered to have important roles in the establishment and maintenance of community structure. We conclude that interpretations of the roles of individual species must be based on direct, experimental investigation. In this system, there was no indication that many of the species were functionally insignificant. The present experiments also revealed that the interactions among even a few species are very varied and complex; proper investigation requires considerable replication and repeated experimentation in different places and years. Finally, although the present studies allow reliable interpretations of observed patterns of occupancy and dominance on natural shores, the experiments did not provide a predictive framework to anticipate the future events in any area. This is because of great variability in the timing and intensity of recruitment of planktonic propagules of all the components in the system, and in the density and activity of predatory whelks in different areas. These results suggest that tightly co-evolved community relationships are not likely to be important, even if they appear to exist, in communities where most of the species have widely dispersed pelagic offspring and interact in diverse and complex ways at different densities." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4946db17d0a4faafff2ab9a7ecc2a8c6> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Passive acoustic telemetry and conventional tag/re-sight techniques were used to study daily movement patterns of adult yellow tang, Zebrasoma flavescens, over a period of months. Range testing and visual observations revealed the limitations of using small acoustic transmitters to monitor movements of small coral reef fish in a topographically complex and noisy coral reef environment. Visual observations of conventionally tagged and albino fish suggest individuals return each day to forage over the same few hundred m2 of shallow, turf algae dominated boulder and reef flat habitat for periods of at least weeks to months. Acoustic telemetry data suggest lower frequency of repeated use of daytime foraging, nighttime refuge and sunset spawning sites. However, integration of observation and acoustic telemetry data revealed that many fish were not detected while they were within the empirically tested range of the receivers. These observations indicate that data from passive acoustic telemetry can underestimate the frequency and duration of repeated use of specific areas. Yellow tang adults made daily crepuscular migrations of up to 600 m between foraging and spawning or sheltering sites at consistent times relative to sunset and sunrise. While there was high individual variability in migration distance, almost all individuals moved in the same direction (from south to north) at sunset. This study provided valuable information for evaluating ongoing fishery management efforts using marine protected areas in Hawaii." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/0eb9b63044ed17bd74f3723eaa5c0af3> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The Paleocene-Early Eocene larger benthic foraminifera (LBF) in the far eastern Neo-Tethyan Ocean of Tibet still remain poorly known. Here, we present a novel, high-resolution larger foraminiferal biozonation from the shallow-water limestones in Tibet, which will improve our current understanding of the larger foraminiferal evolution in the eastern Neo-Tethyan Ocean. Based on one continuous section at Tingri and three separate sections at Gamba, ten Shallow Benthic Zones (SBZ 1–10) have been designated in Tibet by following the principle of Oppel Zone. In contrast to those in Europe, the Paleocene LBFs in Tibet are characterized by high diversification of Lockhartia, Kathina, Daviesina, Miscellanea, Ranikothalia, and Operculina and show progressively increasing diversity of genera and species during SBZ 2–5. Adult dimorphism and large shell size of some LBFs as well as differentiation of the diversity between genera and species initiated as early as SBZ 3. It suggests that the occurrence of the Larger Foraminifera Turnover (LFT) was probably not synchronous in the entire Neo-Tethyan Ocean, because in Europe, the LFT was generally thought to occur at the beginning of SBZ 5. During the Early Eocene, the LBFs in Tibet decreased markedly on the generic level and increased on the species level, and some new genera (Alveolina, Orbitolites, Nummulites, Assilina, Discocyclina) have gained predominance in Tibet. It is nearly identical to the evolution of the LBFs in Europe and indicates a high-degree homogenization of the LBFs in the entire Neo-Tethyan Ocean. Furthermore, the Paleocene-Eocene (P-E) boundary in shallow-water environments has been clearly identified by us, and it is situated in the upper part of SBZ 5 and associated with no evident biotic turnover of shallow benthic foraminiferal communities. The possible diachroneity of the LFT in the Neo-Tethyan Ocean and the evident lagging of the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM) behind the LFT imply that the LFT could only be the result of a natural evolutionary process and has no linkage with the PETM. Notably, a transient but distinct larger foraminiferal extinction and origination (LFEO) event has been found in Tibet, which is characterized by a sudden disappearance of all Paleocene lamellar-perforate LBFs, such as Lockhartia, Kathina, Daviesina, Miscellanea, Ranikothalia, and Operculina, and the initial dominance of the Early Eocene porcellaneous-walled Alveolina. The LFEO marks the boundary between SBZ 5 and 6, and might only occur in the low-latitude areas of the Neo-Tethyan Ocean. Surprisingly, the LFEO coincides with the initial recovery of the Carbon Isotope Excursion (CIE), and their synchronicity implies that some possible mechanisms causing the rapid recovery of the CIE probably had also led to the LFEO in the shallow-water environments." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/74c184b0f6ef777a9253ade94f8547ac> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract A new species of digenean, Pseudobacciger cheneyae n. sp., is described from the intestines of Weber’s chromis (Chromis weberi Fowler & Bean) from off Lizard Island, Great Barrier Reef, Australia. This species differs from the three described species of Pseudobacciger Nahhas & Cable, 1964 [P. cablei Madhavi, 1975, P. harengulae Yamaguti, 1938 and P. manteri Nahhas & Cable, 1964] in combinations of the size of the suckers and the length of the caeca. The host of the present species is a perciform (Family Pomacentridae) which contrasts with previous records of the genus which are almost exclusively from clupeiform fishes. The genus Pseudobacciger is presently recognised within the family Faustulidae (Poche, 1926) but phylogenetic analyses of 28S and ITS2 rDNA show that the new species bears no relationship to species of four other faustulid genera (Antorchis Linton, 1911, Bacciger Nicoll, 1924, Paradiscogaster Yamaguti, 1934 and Trigonocryptus Martin, 1958) but that instead it is nested within the Gymnophalloidea (Odhner, 1905) as sister to the Tandanicolidae (Johnston, 1927). This result suggests that the Faustulidae is polyphyletic." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/be128ec7f1a52de1aa7f7e84fa420298> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Background Anopheles gambiae s.s. and An. coluzzii are two of the most important malaria vector species in sub-Saharan Africa. These recently-diverged sibling species do not exhibit intrinsic post-zygotic barriers to reproduction and are thought to be separated by strong assortative mating combined with selection against hybrids. At present, little is known about the ecological conditions that determine hybridization and introgression between these cryptic taxa. MethodsSwarm segregation and assortative mating were studied in Western Burkina Faso in the villages of Vallée du Kou (VK7) and Soumousso which differed in terms of which sibling species was much rarer than the other, and in Bana where both occurred in similar proportions. Swarms and pairs in copula were collected and genotyped, the proportion of intra and interspecific mating determined, and interspecific sperm transfer checked genetically. Females were collected through larval and adult indoor collections and genotyped or sexed-and-genotyped via a novel multiplex PCR. ResultsA total of 3,687 males and 220 females were collected and genotyped from 109 swarms. Only 3 swarms were composed of males from both species, and these were from the village of VK7 where An. gambiae s.s. was comparatively rare. Mixed-species pairs captured in copula were only detected in that area and made for 3.62 % and 100 % of mating pairs involving An. coluzzii and An. gambiae s.s. individuals, respectively. The high An. gambiae s.s. cross-mating rate was mirrored by high rates of hybridizations estimated from female larvae and adults indoor collections. This contrasted with Soumousso, where despite being much less common than An. gambiae s.s., An. coluzzii males did not form mixed swarms, females were not found in interspecific swarms or copula and hybridization rates were low in both sibling species. ConclusionsThese data suggest that ecological conditions leading to rare An. gambiae s.s. in populations dominated by An. coluzzii may promote a breakdown of spatial swarm segregation and assortative mating between the two species. The lower overall hybridization rates observed at the larval and adult indoor stages compared to cross-mating rates support the idea that post-mating selection processes acting against hybrids may occur mostly prior to and/or at the early larval stages." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2a54dfabd393672a05101316f18a47f8> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Because of the obvious importance of P as a nutrient that often accelerates growth of phytoplankton (including toxic cyanobacteria) and therefore worsens water quality, much interest has been devoted to P exchange across the sediment-water interface. Generally, the release mode of P from the sediment differed greatly between shallow and deep lakes, and much of the effort has been focused on iron and oxygen, and also on the relevant environmental factors, for example, turbulence and decomposition, but a large part of the P variation in shallow lakes remains unexplained. This paper reviews experimental and field studies on the mechanisms of P release from the sediment in the shallow temperate (in Europe) and subtropical (in the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River in China) lakes, and it is suggested that pH rather than DO might be more important in driving the seasonal dynamics of internal P loading in these shallow lakes, i.e., intense photosynthesis of phytoplankton increases pH of the lake water and thus may increase pH of the surface sediment, leading to enhanced release of P (especially iron-bound P) from the sediment. Based on the selective pump of P (but not N) from the sediment by algal blooms, it is concluded that photosynthesis which is closely related to eutrophication level is the driving force for the seasonal variation of internal P loading in shallow lakes. This is a new finding. Additionally, the selective pump of P from the sediment by algal blooms not only explains satisfactorily why both TP and PO4-P in the hypereutrophic Lake Donghu declined significantly since the mid-1980s when heavy cyanobacterial blooms were eliminated by the nontraditional biomanipulation (massive stocking of the filter-feeding silver and bighead carps), but also explains why TP in European lakes decreased remarkably in the spring clear-water phase with less phytoplankton during the seasonal succession of aquatic communities or when phytoplankton biomass was decreased by traditional biomanipulation. Compared with deep lakes, wax and wane of phytoplankton due to alternations in the ecosystem structure is also able to exert significant influences on the P exchange at the sediment-water interface in shallow lakes. In other words, biological activities are also able to drive P release from sediments, and such a static P release process is especially more prominent in eutrophic shallow lakes with dense phytoplankton." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/29038fedd2d7e3769ea679b31cb811cc> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Costs and benefits associated with matings and the effects of mating frequency on fitness commonly differ between the sexes. As a result, outcrossing simultaneous hermaphrodites may prefer to copulate in the more rewarding sex role, generating conflicts over sperm donation and sperm receipt between mates. Because recent sex role preference models remain controversial, we contrast here some of their assumptions and predictions in the sea slug Chelidonura sandrana. For this hermaphrodite with sperm storage and internal fertilisation, risk-averse models assume that fitness pay-offs are constantly higher in the female than in the male function in any single mating. Moreover, excluding mutual partner assessment, these models predict male mating behaviour to be independent of receiver traits. The competing gender ratio hypothesis assumes that relative fitness pay-offs, and thus the preferred mating roles, vary and may reverse between matings and predicts that ejaculation strategies co-vary with receiver quality. We found that field mating rates of C. sandrana substantially exceeded what is required to maintain female fertility and fecundity, indicating large variation in direct female benefits between matings. We further demonstrate that male copulation duration adaptively increased with partner body size (i.e. fecundity) but decreased with recent partner promiscuity. These findings are compatible with the gender ratio hypothesis but contradict risk-averse models." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/fb31d686f458f0c5ae82b8d9e100f612> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract A recent study in BMC Biology has determined that the immature stage of the bed bug (the nymph) signals its reproductive status to adult males using pheromones and thus avoids the trauma associated with copulation in this species. The success of this nymphal strategy of deterrence is instructive. Against the background of increasing problems with bed bugs, this research raises the question whether pheromones might be used to control them. See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/121" .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/065d87b0a8443f0fdda6c30ea3b3f02e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The effect of temperature upon the development of large hibernated larvaæ of fourMyrmica species has been tested experimentally. Over the viable temperature range of 15–25°C, it was found that:1.There are no differences between the species in the effect of temperature upon development times. All fit the model log Dev. time=a-b T°C with a common value for b. This gives an effective Q10 of about 3.1 which agrees with respirometrical estimates for worker ants.2.The value for the intercept (a) differs significantly between most species confirming the intrinsic difference that has been demonstrated at a constant 22.5°C in previous work. The development times of larvæ can be ordered from fastest to slowest being:Myrmica ruginodis Nyl.,Myrmica rubra L.,Myrmica scabrinodis Nyl. andMyrmica sabuleti Meinert. At any temperature it takesM. sabuleti about 1.5 times as long asM. ruginodis to grow from a large hibernated larva to a white pupa.3.No large differences in larval survival or gyne production could be detected between the temperature treatments. There was an indication that most species, survived best at about 22°C.4.The results are discussed briefly in terms of the ecological distribution of the four species in the South of England.5.The possible effects of a fluctuating temperature regime are discussed, it is suggested that the amplitude of fluctuations may not have any great effect whereas the periodicity could be more important." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/82ed0fa748c9be5013b0eb05f25c10c6> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Comparison of the current approaches to human ecology shows a contradiction between certain views on the subject and the methodology of its analysis. The notion of human ecology as the ecology of the species Homo sapiens is being developed in terms of modern general ecology and should be considered at all organizational levels, from individual to global. Material and spiritual cultures, which are the main adaptations of human beings represent a continuation of the general trend of living matter towards progressive evolution and are accompanied by an increase in orderliness related to the intensification of energy consumption. This superindividual adaptation determines the human capacity for occupying new ecological niches without changing the hereditary background. Therefore, consideration of Homo sapiens at the superorganismal level is of special importance in human ecology. Analysis of this issue shows that the functional patterns of systems belonging to this level have certain characteristics in common with those of the population systems of other species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f7c3d2b62080f9a07ac40b4d4cf75887> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Culture experiments involving 23 algae strains were conducted to evaluate the algicidal effects of a newly developed algicidal thiazolidinedione (TD) derivative (TD49) on non-harmful and harmful algal bloom (HAB) species. We also assessed the effect of various concentrations of TD49 on various growth phases (lag, logarithmic, and stationary) of the harmful algae Heterocapsa circularisquama (Dinophyceae) and Heterosigma akashiwo (Raphidophyceae; hereafter, Heterosigma) and the non-harmful diatoms Skeletonema costatum and Chaetoceros didymus. The inhibitory ratios (%) for H. circularisquama and Heterosigma at 2.0 μM TD49 were significantly higher than those at other concentrations, and the inhibitory ratio varied depending on growth phase and species as follows: logarithmic ≥ stationary > lag phase for H. circularisquama and logarithmic ≥ lag > stationary phase for Heterosigma. Although the inhibitory ratios for C. didymus were similar to those for the two harmful algae (H. circularisquama and Heterosigma), inhibitory effects on S. costatum were not apparent at >2.0 μM in any growth phase. The algicidal activity of TD49 on the harmful and non-harmful algae was as follows: unarmored HAB species > armored HAB species > diatom species > cryptophyte species. TD49 was algicidal to most HABs but had a little inhibitory effect on some non-harmful algae, implying that TD49 has selective algicidal activity. Our results indicate that TD49 is potentially of use in the control of HAB species within semi-enclosed bays." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/62c62ce63400925226274491ae0dd584> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Key processes during recruitment of Quercus petraea and Corylus avellana were investigated in abandoned calcareous grasslands and adjacent scrub using the following methods: (1) observation of hoarding animals during the main period of ripening of acorns and hazel nuts, (2) exposition of seeds on the soil surface and in 5–6 cm depth to test differences in predation and germination, and (3) mapping of seedlings in the grasslands. European jays (Garrulus glandarius) and mice were the main disperser of seeds. Jays preferred acorns, whereas the rodents were less selective, but probably more important for dispersal of nuts. The maximum dispersal distance was about 10–20 m for mice and was estimated several hundred metres for jays. Mice collected hoards of several seeds in about 2 cm depth in the soil, whereas jays stored single seeds. Seed predation and probably hoarding by mice were highest under scrub and in unmown grassland, while jays preferred mown sites for hoarding. However, hiding of seeds in the soil reduced losses in all sites. Predation of nuts was slightly less intensive than that of acorns. Seeds of Corylus were more sensitive to desiccation than Quercus, but in both species germination was lower for seeds exposed on the soil surface and in drier sites. Quercus and Corylus were the most abundant woody species in the fallow grasslands, probably due to the effective multi-staged dispersal by jays and mice, whereas wind-dispersed and fleshy-fruited species were less common; the latter restricted to margins of adjacent scrubland. The study provides several examples for discordance in suitability of patches for seeds and seedlings due to different habitat requirements of successive developmental stages. This result emphasizes the need for studies in the multiple stages during recruitment of vertebrate-dispersed plants." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/402ecc3ade1013c855c0f770ce994d87> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Unpalatable plant species often act as biotic refuges by protecting neighboring plants from herbivores. This positive interaction can increase functional diversity in grazed ecosystems by protecting species sensitive to grazing. While many studies investigate pair-wise interactions between benefactors and beneficiaries, few show that these interactions result in community composition effects. We studied the effect of an unpalatable plant, Juncus effusus, on wetland plant communities in grazed and ungrazed plots. We tested the following predictions: (1) Juncus would increase plant functional diversity in grazed wetlands; (2) Juncus would have significant effects on community composition; and (3) the effects of Juncus on other species would change across the grazing gradient. We found that Juncus preserved functional diversity in grazed wetland communities by protecting species that decrease with grazing pressure. In multivariate analyses, grazing was the strongest driver of species composition but we found significant effects of Juncus on both vegetation change and species composition in grazed plots. Interactions with Juncus were facilitative in grazed plots and competitive in ungrazed plots, but did not vary along the grazing gradient (0.15–1.7 cows/ha). These results indicate that Juncus has significant community composition effects in grazed wetland plant communities. Understanding the effects of plant interactions such as these at the community level is essential to applying plant interactions to restoration or management." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/7d47228915639784c92f8d32d2fafb1d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Dik-diks (Madoqua sp.) inhabit semi-arid regions and experience very different conditions of food availability and quality between wet and dry seasons. By comparing the behaviour of dik-diks between these two seasons, we identified environmental constraints affecting their feeding strategies. In both seasons foraging time was limited by high mid day temperatures. In the wet season a high intake rate compensates for the loss in foraging time, but in the dry season water and protein become limiting. To meet minimum daily water requirements in the dry season dik-diks fed on plant species that they avoided during the wet season. Analysis at the plant species level showed higher species selectivity in the wet season than in the dry season. In a multiple regression analysis food species preferences were best explained by relative abundance and water content in the dry season, and by dry matter content in the wet season. In the wet season the daily dry-matter intake of dik-diks in the field was only about 10% higher than the theoretically predicted minimum for a ruminant of this body weight, while protein and water intake were about 3 times as high. This suggests that the most limiting dietary component in the wet season is energy. In the dry season the daily intake of all dietary components is lower than the theoretical minimum required, and also lower than the values suggested by laboratory studies of dik-diks. This dry season deficit is presumably met from body reserves. Dry season water intake was approximately 30% of the intake observed in laboratory studies indicating that dikdiks are even better adapted to arid conditions than suggested by physiological experiments." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/89d0f02bb25830d5441718932575219c> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The phytoplankton communities of five water hollows and a river from the Rancho Hambre peat bog (Tierra del Fuego, Argentina) are compared as to species composition and densities, as well as morphological, chemical and physical data. A total of 212 taxa is reported, the river having the highest species richness (105) and algal density (6374 ind. ml−1). Water hollows showed remarkable differences in the structure of their phytoplankton communities. A cluster analysis, based on species presence-absence, clearly distinguishes the river from the water hollows. The hollows fall into groups. One contains the shallow ones the other, the smallest, deepest ones. Correlation analyses between biotic and abiotic variates shows strong correlations between the relative frequencies of some major groups (Chrysophyceae, Euglenophyceae, Tribophyceae) and the values of abiotic variables (alkalinity, pH, conductivity and dissolved phosphate)." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f0c473b43e61cea0d59a51f215ee400d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Blowflies have major medical and sanitary importance because they can be vectors of viruses, bacteria, and helminths and are also causative agents of myiasis. Also, these flies, especially those belonging to the genus Chrysomya, are among the first insects to arrive at carcasses and are therefore valuable in providing data for the estimation of the minimum postmortem interval (PMImin). The PMImin can be calculated by assessing the weight, length, or development stage of blowfly larvae. Lack of information on the variables that might affect these parameters in different fly species can generate inaccuracies in estimating the PMImin. This study evaluated the effects of different types of bovine tissues (the liver, muscle, tongue, and stomach) and chicken heart on the development rates of larvae of Chrysomya albiceps Wiedemann, Chrysomya megacephala Fabricius, and Chrysomya putoria Wiedemann (Diptera: Calliphoridae). The efficiency of each rearing substrate was assessed by maggot weight gain (mg), larval development time (h), larval and pupal survival (%), and emergence interval (h). The development rates of larvae of all blowfly species studied here were directly influenced by the type of food substrate. Tissues that have high contents of protein and fat (muscle and heart) allowed the highest larval weight gain. For bovine liver, all Chrysomya species showed slower growth, by as much as 48 h, compared to the other tissues. Different rates of development are probably associated with specific energy requirements of calliphorids and the nutritional composition of each type of food." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/3aca471f4d00c350459a2bda29782355> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract. To evaluate the adaptive value of daphnian aggregation associated with attack abatement, a combined laboratory and field experiment was performed. As the lake investigated does not contain planktivorous fish, only invertebrate predation is important. In the laboratory, newly collected Chaoborus flavicans, among the most important predators to exploit the Daphnia population in the lake, were individually placed in a spherical flask containing different densities of juvenile Daphnia prey. The number of successful attacks of Chaoborus was independent of prey abundance. Thus, in a given density regime, each individual prey gained protection from a dilution effect. In the field, dense aggregates of Daphnia were created by continuously adding food at a localized point in the littoral. Even though the food input produced aggregates of Daphnia which were maintained for 3 h, the number of invertebrate predators did not increase in the input area. It is concluded that each Daphnia in a group reduces the probability of predation through an effect of attack abatement which is approximately proportional to the number of prey in the group. However, when considering the high median density of Daphnia, together with their strong response to food input, it seems more plausible that natural aggregates are driven by a patchy food distribution, whereas attack abatement is only a secondary effect of aggregation." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/dd919bfec7d1cc8089bd1defc33301e5> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The evolution of defensive traits is driven both by benefits gained from protection against enemies and by costs of defence production. We tested the hypothesis that specialisation of herbivores on toxic host plants, accompanied by the ability to acquire plant defensive compounds for herbivore defence, is favoured by the lower costs of sequestration compared to de novo synthesis of defensive compounds. We measured physiological costs of chemical defence as a reduction in larval performance in response to repeated removal of secretions (simulating predator attack) and compared these costs between five species synthesising defences de novo and three species sequestering salicylic glucosides (SGs) from their host plants. Experiments simulating low predator pressure revealed no physiological costs in terms of survival, weight and duration of development in any of study species. However, simulation of high predation caused reduction in relative growth rate in Chrysomela lapponica larvae producing autogenous defences more frequently, than in larvae sequestering SGs. Still meta-analysis of combined data showed no overall difference in costs of autogenous and sequestered defences. However, larvae synthesising their defences de novo demonstrated secretion-conserving behaviour, produced smaller amounts of secretions, replenished them at considerably lower rates and employed other types of defences (regurgitation, evasion) more frequently when compared to sequestering larvae. These latter results provide indirect evidence for biosynthetic constraints for amounts of defensive secretions produced de novo, resulting in low defence effectiveness. Lifting these constraints by sequestration may have driven some leaf beetle lineages toward sequestration of plant allelochemicals as the main defensive strategy." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f746fa1ae563dc17f568d5f434285b3e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Many global change drivers chronically alter resource availability in terrestrial ecosystems. Such resource alterations are known to affect aboveground net primary production (ANPP) in the short term; however, it is unknown if patterns of response change through time. We examined the magnitude, direction, and pattern of ANPP responses to a wide range of global change drivers by compiling 73 datasets from long-term (>5 years) experiments that varied by ecosystem type, length of manipulation, and the type of manipulation. Chronic resource alterations resulted in a significant change in ANPP irrespective of ecosystem type, the length of the experiment, and the resource manipulated. However, the pattern of ecosystem response over time varied with ecosystem type and manipulation length. Continuous directional responses were the most common pattern observed in herbaceous-dominated ecosystems. Continuous directional responses also were frequently observed in longer-term experiments (>11 years) and were, in some cases, accompanied by large shifts in community composition. In contrast, stepped responses were common in forests and other ecosystems (salt marshes and dry valleys) and with nutrient manipulations. Our results suggest that the response of ANPP to chronic resource manipulations can be quite variable; however, responses persist once they occur, as few transient responses were observed. Shifts in plant community composition over time could be important determinants of patterns of terrestrial ecosystem sensitivity, but comparative, long-term studies are required to understand how and why ecosystems differ in their sensitivity to chronic resource alterations." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/66f89e27860aaca96c03cc57de142f01> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The reproductive ecology of the gobiid fish Bathygobius fuscus was studied at Nobeoka, Miyazaki, Japan. Males of this species maintain small rock holes as a nest and females spawn an egg mass on the wall of the nest. The males employed two forms of mating tactic: nest holding and sneaking. A nest holder stayed in the nest and waited for a female to visit, whereas a sneaker intruded into a nest while a pair was engaged in reproduction. Males larger than 55 mm standard length were always nest holders; those of smaller size employed both tactics. As the larger males excluded the smaller males, the latter did not occupy a nest hole. With a decrease in the number of larger males, smaller males changed their mating tactic from sneaking to nest holding. The results suggest that male Bathygobius fuscus adopt a conditional strategy whereby they change their tactic depending on their social status." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4ce5cfc53d8f0a7971d35048639b0d4f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Predator-prey interactions were studied among a small prey fish (the johnny darter Etheostoma nigrum) and two predators (crayfish Orconectes rusticus and smallmouth bass Micropterus dolomieui) with complementary foraging behaviors. When only smallmouth bass were present, darters reduced activity to 6% of control rates and spent most of the time hiding under tile shelters. When only crayfish were present, darter activity and shelter-use were similar to controls. When both crayfish and bass were present, an interaction occurred. Darters, normally inactive in the presence of bass, were often forced to move by approaching crayfish and thus activity increased to 19% of control rates. Also, darters were often evicted from shelters by intruding crayfish. Thus, crayfish increased the vulnerability of small fish to bass by evicting them from shelters and causing increased activity. Conversely, bass increased the vulnerability of small fish to crayfish by forcing these fish to seek cover under shelters occupied by crayfish. Intimidation effects of bass on darters last for some time. After a 30-min exposure to bass, darters showed reduced activity and increased shelter use lasting at least 24 h after the bass was removed. Thus predators, throught intimidation, can influence prey behavior even though the predators are no longer present." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b44e54a7c91eca062bf86f28c65a8269> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The ecological role of plant secondary compounds has received a great deal of attention yet little is known regarding variation in the ecological significance of different compounds produced by a single species. This is particularly pertinent to species where variation in compound presence is under genetic control. In this study we have quantified variation in the inhibitory effects of the six dominant monoterpene oils produced by different genotypes (or chemotypes) of Thymus vulgaris on achene germination of an associated species (Brachypodium phoenicoides), and seeds of T. vulgaris itself, in controlled experimental conditions. The experiments involved the germination of seeds of the two species with crushed leaves or pure essences of the six chemotypes, i.e. four experimental trials. A significant inhibitory effect against B. phoenicoides was found for both crushed leaves and the range of concentrations of pure oils used in the trial. The two phenolic compounds had a greater effect than the non-phenolic leaves and pure oils. The significant differences between non-phenols and the controls declined faster over time for crushed leaves and low concentrations of the pure essences than did that between the phenolics and the controls. There was a significant inhibitory effect against the germination of T. vulgaris seeds for the crushed leaves and the pure oils, although the contrast between the non-phenols and the phenols was not significant. The effect of the different oils varied depending on the seed source of the thyme seeds used in the trial. This is suggested to be due to differences in the rates of outcrossing among the sampled populations. The effects of the oils on the associated species, B. phoenicoides, were not found to be greater than their effects on the germination of thyme seeds. The results are discussed in the context of a potential role for such inhibitory effects in relation to the onset of rainfall and suitable germination conditions." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/efa3769edcb9dedf4eef145ee0b6a2ed> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Predators can indirectly enhance plant performance via herbivore suppression, with both prey consumption and changes in prey traits (e.g. changes in foraging behaviour) contributing to the reduction in herbivory. We performed a field experiment to determine the extent of such non-consumptive effects which consisted of repeatedly placing spiders (Pisaura mirabilis) on enclosed plants (Urtica dioica) for cue deposition. Control plants were enclosed in the same way but without spiders. After cue deposition, the enclosures were removed to allow arthropods to colonize the plants and feed on them. Arthropods were removed from the plants before the subsequent spider deposition or control enclosure. During six cycles of enclosure, we quantified leaf damage on the plants. After a seventh cycle, the colonizing arthropods were sampled to determine community composition in relation to the presence/absence of spider cues. We found that the presence of chemotactile spider cues reduced leaf damage by 50 %. In addition, spider cues led to changes in the arthropod community: smaller spiders avoided plants with spider cues. In contrast, the aphid-tending ant Myrmica rubra showed higher recruitment of workers on cue-bearing plants, possibly to protect aphids. Our results show that the risk of spider predation can reduce herbivory on wild plants and also demonstrate that non-consumptive effects can be particularly strong within the predator guild." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/cc0c8badac979c2c70f8e51a4af6e9c0> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract We present a study based on X-ray chronologies and the stable isotopic composition of fossil Porites spp. corals from the northern Gulf of Aqaba (Red Sea) covering the mid-Holocene period from 5750 to 4450 14C years BP (before present). The stable oxygen and carbon isotopic compositions of five specimens reveal regular annual periodicities. Compared with modern Porites spp. from the same environment, the average seasonal δ 18O amplitude of the fossil corals is higher (by ca. 0.35–0.60‰), whereas annual growth rates are lower (by ca. 3.5 to 2 mm/year). This suggests stronger seasonality of sea surface temperatures and increased variability of the oxygen isotopic composition of the sea water due to changes in the precipitation and evaporation regime during the mid-Holocene. Most likely, summer monsoon rains reached the northern end of the Red Sea at that time. Average annual coral growth rates are diminished probably due to an increased input and resuspension of terrestrial debris to the shallow marine environment during more humid conditions. Our results corroborate published reports of paleodata and model simulations suggesting a northward migration of the African monsoon giving rise to increased seasonalities during the mid-Holocene over northeastern Africa and Arabia." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/c6f1fe451f3eba693a031fe5d15bc058> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The temperature and atmospheric humidity in a tropical lowland rain forest in Costa Rica were measured in order to assess the microclimate in different forest environments. Two disturbed sites, a single tree fall gap (400 m2) and an 0.5 hectare clearing, were compared for periods up to two years after disturbance. Two locations in primary forest, the canopy and understory, were also monitored. Temperatures were highest in the clearing, intermediate in the canopy and gap which were similar, and lowest in the understory. Vapor pressure deficits (VPD) were highest in the clearing, followed by the canopy, the gap and the understory. With regrowth of the vegetation in the gap and clearing sites, the temperatures and vapor pressure deficits significantly decreased. After 1 year, the microclimate at seedling height in the clearing resembled that of the gap, and after two years the microclimate of the gap was very similar to that of the understory. Seasonal differences in temperature and VPD were small compared to differences caused by changes in the stature of the vegetation." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/845ebfccb8bfe357233b6c4dcf0b9616> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Stable carbon isotope composition varies markedly between sun and shade leaves, with sun leaves being invariably more enriched (i.e., they contain more13C). Several hypotheses have emerged to explain this pattern, but controversy remains as to which mechanism is most general. We measured vertical gradients in stable carbon isotope composition (δ13C) in more than 200 trees of nine conifer species growing in mixed-species forests in the Northern Rocky Mountains, USA. For all species except western larch, δ13C decreased from top to bottom of the canopy. We found that δ13C was strongly correlated with nitrogen per unit leaf area (N area), which is a measure of photosynthetic capacity. Usually weaker correlations were found between δ13C and leaf mass per area, nitrogen per unit leaf mass, height from the ground, or depth in the canopy, and these correlations were more variable between trees than for N area. Gradients of δ13C (per meter canopy depth) were steeper in small trees than in tall trees, indicating that a recent explanation of δ13C gradients in terms of drought stress of upper canopy leaves is unlikely to apply in our study area. The strong relationship between N area and δ13C here reported is consistent with the general finding that leaves or species with higher photosynthetic capacity tend to maintain lower CO2 concentrations inside leaves. We conclude that photosynthetic capacity is a strong determinant of δ13C in vertical canopy profiles, and must be accounted for when interpreting δ13C values in conifer forests." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d7c8fdf148053e4fa3f9926c41616560> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Studies of the trophic ecology of gelatinous zooplankton have predominantly employed gut content analyses and grazing experiments. These approaches record only what is consumed rather than what is assimilated by the jellyfish, only provide evidence of recent feeding, and unless digestion rates of different prey are known, may provide biased estimates of the relative importance of different prey to jellyfish diets. Biochemical tracers, such as stable isotopes and fatty acids, offer several advantages because they differentiate between what is assimilated and what is simply ingested, they provide an analysis of diet that is integrated over time, and may be useful for identifying contributions from sources (e.g., bacteria) that cannot be achieved using gut content approaches. Stable isotope analysis has become more rigorous through recent advances that provide: (1) signature determination of microscopic organisms such as microalgae, (2) analysis of dissolved organic carbon, and (3) improved quantification of relative source contributions. The limitation that natural tracer techniques require different dietary sources to have unique signatures can potentially be overcome using pulse-chase isotope enrichment experiments. Trophic studies of gelatinous zooplankton would benefit by integrating several approaches. For example, gut content analyses may be used to identify potential dietary sources. Stable isotopes could then be used to determine which sources are assimilated and modeling could be used to quantify the contribution of different sources to the diet. Analysis of fatty acid profiles could be used to identify contributions of bacterioplankton to the diet and, potentially, to provide an alternative means of identifying dietary sources in situations where the isotopic signatures of different potential dietary sources overlap. In this review, we outline the application, advantages, and limitations of gut content analyses and stable isotope and fatty acid tracer techniques and discuss the benefits of using an integrated approach toward studies of the trophic ecology of gelatinous zooplankton." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/94f1b3b801fd058b35e61a37f57116a0> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Preliminary findings of a high prevalence of Clonorchis sinensis in wild-caught fish in a North Vietnam reservoir (Thac Ba reservoir, Yen Bai Province) prompted a longitudinal epidemiological study of fish infections. Monthly collections of fish from September 2014 to August 2015 were processed for recovery of metacercariae; 1219 fish, representing 22 species, were examined. Seven species were infected with C. sinensis metacercariae. Four species, Toxabramis houdemeri, Hemiculter leucisculus, Cultrichthys erythropterus, and Culter recurvirostris, had high prevalence (31.1 to 76.7 %); metacercarial intensities ranged from 3.9 to 65.7 metacercariae/fish. A seasonal variation of C. sinensis prevalence was observed in T. houdemeri. Variation in intensity of infection occurred in C. erythropterus and H. leucisculus. Intensity and prevalence of C. sinensis in the most highly infected species, T. houdemeri, varied by fish size; prevalence was higher in fish weighing more than 3 g, and intensity was higher in fish weighing more than 5 g. The distribution of metacercariae in the body region of T. houdemeri was significantly higher in the caudal fin (14.7 metacercariae/g), compared to the body and head regions (0.7 and 1.4 metacercariae/g, respectively). Further epidemiological investigations on C. sinensis in this reservoir region should include assessing the relative risk of the different fish species for humans based on the latter’s food preferences, and the prevalence of C. sinensis in the community. The snail intermediate host(s) in the reservoir should also be identified along with the ecological factors influencing its exposure to C. sinensis eggs and its subsequent transmission of cercariae to fish. Also needed are investigations on the relative importance of wild and domestic reservoir hosts as sources of egg contamination of the reservoir." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/cfbeeeeecda1b7ea56e41ce7fadb58f5> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary We tested the hypotheses that rates of decomposition in a desert should be higher following single large rain events of 25 mm than evenly spaced 6 mm events and that supplemental rainfall should result in higher populations of soil biota. There were no significant differences in mass losses of creosotebush, Larrea tridentata, leaf litter on plots receiving water supplementation and no added water. On some sampling dates, there were higher mass losses in the 6 mm·week-1 treatment. Weekly rainfall produced higher coefficients of variation in mass losses than the other rainfall regimes. A single event pulse compared with weekly pulses of rainfall during the normal “dry” period resulted in no differences in mass losses. Microarthropods and nematodes exhibited numerical responses to supplemental rainfall but the litter microflora did not. These studies provide direct experimental evidence that the conventional wisdom linking decomposition to rainfall in deserts is wrong. The studies also suggest that the effects of litter fauna on surface litter decomposition are minimal; therefore, future studies should focus on activites of the microflora." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a06ce2a4e2f55826d697f86df376e254> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Lethrinitrema gibbus n. g., n. sp. and L. dossenus n. sp. are described from the fish Lethrinus rubrioperculatus Sato collected off New Caledonia, South Pacific. Members of Lethrinitrema n. g. (Ancyrocephalidae) are characterised by having two pyriform haptoral reservoirs and ventral anchors with lateral grooves. The elongate tubular distal end of each reservoir bifurcates, draining into a superficial lateral groove on each side of the ventral anchors. The haptoral reservoirs are postulated to store secretory products which assist in attachment to the host. Lethrinitrema spp. also possess tandem gonads, a male copulatory organ without an accessory piece or with thinly sclerotised accessory piece, and a dextrolateral, non-sclerotised vaginal bulb. The two new species have small, poorly demarcated haptors with small haptoral armament and a crown-like piece on the tip of the inner root of the ventral anchors. They differ from each other in the shape and size of the ventral bar and male copulatory organ (40–45 μm in length in L. gibbusvs 24–30 μm in L. dossenus). Three other species, previously included in Haliotrema Johnston & Tiegs, 1922, are transferred to Lethrinitrema, i.e. L. chrysostomi (Young, 1968) n. comb., L. fleti (Young, 1968) n. comb. (both briefly redescribed from paratypes) and L. lethrini (Yamaguti, 1937) n. comb. All species of Lethrinitrema parasitise Lethrinus spp. (Lethrinidae), and there is evidence for the existence of further Lethrinitrema spp. on Lethrinus spp. in the Indo-Pacific region." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/44360630c1f435bc74108446ee824ce8> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract In this study, we describe the seasonal variation in 15N abundance in the litter of two Sphagnum species and four vascular plant species during 3 years of field decomposition in an Italian Alpine bog. Litter bags were periodically retrieved at the end of summer and winter periods, and the δ15N in residual litter was related to mass loss, litter chemistry, and climatic conditions. In Sphagnum litter, higher rates of decomposition during summer months were associated with an increase of δ15N probably due to the incorporation of microbial organic compounds rich in 15N. The litter of Eriophorum vaginatum and Carex rostrata was characterized by a decrease of δ15N, so that the final signature was significantly lower than in initial litter. On the other hand, the residual litter of Potentilla erecta and Calluna vulgaris was characterized by a final δ15N higher than in initial litter. Our data reported a seasonality of 15N abundance in the residual litter of Sphagnum species, but not in that of vascular plant species, thus highlighting the role of differences in litter chemistry." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/def0ce7565ed53cf4d9b2aa742d9e9fd> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Patch dynamics, tree injury and mortality, and coarse woody detritus were quantified to examine the ecological impacts of Hurricane Fran on an oak-hickory-pine forest near Chapel Hill, NC. Data from long-term vegetation plots (1990–1997) and aerial photographs (1998) indicated that this 1996 storm caused patchy disturbance of intermediate severity (10–50% tree mortality; Woods, J Ecol 92:464–476, 2004). The area in large disturbance patches (>0.1 ha) increased from <1% to approximately 4% of the forested landscape. Of the forty-two 0.1-ha plots that were studied, 23 were damaged by the storm and lost 1–66% of their original live basal area. Although the remaining 19 plots gained basal area (1–15% increase), across all 42 stands basal area decreased by 17% because of storm impacts. Overall mortality of trees >10 cm dbh was 18%. The basal area of standing dead trees after the storm was 0.9 m2/ha, which was not substantially different from the original value of 0.7 m2/ha. In contrast, the volume and mass of fallen dead trees after the storm (129 m3/ha; 55 Mg/ha) were 6.1 and 7.9 times greater than the original levels (21 m3/ha; 7 Mg/ha), respectively. Uprooting was the most frequent type of damage, and it increased with tree size. However, two other forms of injury, severe canopy breakage and toppling by other trees, decreased with increasing tree size. Two dominant oak species of intermediate shade-tolerance suffered the largest losses in basal area (30–41% lost). Before the storm they comprised almost half of the total basal area in a forest of 13% shade-tolerant, 69% intermediate, and 18% shade-intolerant trees. Recovery is expected to differ with respect to vegetation (e.g., species composition and diversity) and ecosystem properties (e.g., biomass, detritus mass, and carbon balance). Vegetation may not revert to its former composition; however, reversion of biomass, detritus mass, and carbon balance to pre-storm conditions is projected to occur within a few decades. For example, the net change in ecosystem carbon balance may initially be negative from losses to decomposition, but it is expected to be positive within a decade after the storm. Repeated intermediate-disturbance events of this nature would likely have cumulative effects, particularly on vegetation properties." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/06b0534c8969df60ba6a69514c2653a7> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The present study documents the changes occurring at the biochemical level in white spruce trees (Picea glauca [Moench] Voss) with contrasted growth phenotypes during the summer period. Full-siblings of tall versus small spruces were grown under controlled conditions at constant day/night temperatures (24/15°C) and exposed to a decreasing photoperiod (15.7–12.2 h) simulating natural photoperiod reduction during the summer in eastern Canada. Growth parameters (stem height and tree biomass) were determined and non structural carbohydrates, soluble proteins and amino acids were quantified in current-year needles and stem, oldest stem and roots from mid-July until the end of September 2006. Sucrose was the main soluble sugar found in all organs, but its concentrations did not significantly change during the summer. In contrast, starch concentrations rapidly declined by the end of the experiment, especially in needles and stems. Both sucrose and starch did not generally differ between growth phenotypes. Total soluble protein significantly accumulated by mid-August (14.4 h of photoperiod) in small trees. Arginine and glutamine were the most abundant amino acids found in spruce organs, and their concentrations strongly increased at 14.4 h of photoperiod, especially in small trees. Our results highlight marked differences in nitrogen metabolism in late summer between contrasted growth phenotypes, especially for arginine, an amino acid typically associated with growth arrest and nitrogen reserve in perennial species. They also reveal that old stems and roots are important storage organs of organic reserves." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/767eca315801e03bf36f80dcbb6efa42> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Stachys (Lamiaceae: Lamioideae) is a species-rich, widespread, and taxonomically complex genus. A comparative anatomical study of the petioles and leaf lamina of 34 Stachys taxa representing 12 sections of the genus distributed in Iran was carried out to evaluate interspecific relationships and anatomical features that may be useful in species identification and subgeneric classification. The general leaf anatomy of Stachys species presented here corroborates earlier studies in Lamiaceae and on a few studied species in the genus. Leaf anatomy provides valuable characters that are useful in subgeneric classification as well as species discrimination in Stachys. The most important diagnostic characters are as follows: the shape of transverse section, length of ventral and dorsiventral axis, number of median bundles in the petiole, number of cell layers of palisade and spongy parenchyma, type and thickness of collenchyma as well as trichome type. Based on the present study and in accordance with previous works, some large sections such as Ambleia, Aucheriana, and Fragilicaulis appear to be natural and need minor or no changes in delimitation, while circumscription of sect. Olisia should be revised. Isolated positions of some monotypic or oligotypic sections, such as Pontostachys, Thamnostachys, and Trinerves, as well as Zietenia, are supported by unique leaf anatomical features." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ceda0c03cced879257fe324e39685df1> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The deciduous oak Quercus lobata was a better quality food source than the evergreen oak Q. agrifolia for the California oak moth Phryganidia californica: it supported higher growth rates, produced higher fecundity and survivorship, and higher efficiency of conversion of ingested food (ECI), efficiency of conversion of digested food (ECD) and efficiency of nitrogen utilization (NUE). Total polyphenols and astringency were similar in both oak speices, whereas water content was lower and leaf specific weight higher in Q agrifolia than in Q lobata. Nitrogen was higher in new leaves of Q agrifolia but higher in mature leaves of Q. lobata. Contrary to most other studies, total polyphenols and astringency were higher in new than in mature leaves. These results confirmed my hypothesis that the differences in leaf quality associated with the evergreen or deciduous life form would translate into food of differing quality for herbivores." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/12eea34d3f4b8bf869874b223024a3d2> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The influence of predation risk on the opportunity for female mate choice was investigated in the tailspot wrasse Halichoeres melanurus at two sites on a coral reef in Okinawa, Japan. Females mated repeatedly with the nearest males, but they also changed mates frequently at both sites. Mate changes were seen not only in the context of spatiosocial changes (mate disappearance or shifts in male territories) but were also probably the result of actual mate choice by females. Females at one site (site A) changed mates more often and conducted longer spawning trips from their home ranges to male territories than at the other site (site B). Fish at site A were faced with a higher frequency of predators than that of site B. However, fish of site A suffered fewer attacks from predators because they had more shelter, suggesting lower predation risk in that site. These results suggest that females under higher predation risk had less opportunity to choose preferable mates and that they had to mate with the same, nearest males in most cases." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/bef0e350941341fd1eb426f6589587fa> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Mixed species groups and hybridization are common among primates, yet these phenomena are rare and poorly understood for the genus Alouatta. In this study, we describe the composition of howler groups in a sympatric area of Alouatta caraya and Alouatta clamitans and provide new evidence for the occurrence of interspecific hybridization. Between October 2006 and April 2007, 11 howler groups were located in a 150-ha forest fragment: two monospecific groups of A. caraya, two monospecific groups of A. clamitans, two groups composed of A. clamitans and hybrid morphotypes (A. caraya × A. clamitans), and five groups composed of both species together with hybrid morphotypes (mixed species groups). The average size of the studied groups was 5.2 ± 1.2 individuals. Monospecific and mixed groups (mixed species groups + groups with hybrids) did not differ significantly in their sizes. In total, the sex/age ratios were 1 AM:1.5 AF:0.2 SAM:0.5 JUV:0.2 INF and the species ratios were 1 A. caraya:1.6 A. clamitans:0.4 A. caraya × A. clamitans. The ratio of immatures to 1AF was larger in the monospecific groups (0.75 immatures:1AF) than in mixed groups (0.29 immatures:1AF), possibly reflecting a lower viability in the latter. Two features of the hybrid morphotypes of the upper Paraná River support their status as true hybrids: the polymorphism of their coloration patterns and the extremely female-biased sex ratio. The effects of Haldane’s rule and population fragmentation on the interactions between both species are discussed." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ec6eb8f1afcb57e539e3b352c7faf328> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Many prey species face trade-offs in the timing of life history switch points like hatching and metamorphosis. Costs associated with transitioning early depend on the biotic and abiotic conditions found in the subsequent life stage. The red-eyed treefrog, Agalychnis callidryas, faces risks from predators in multiple, successive life stages, and can hatch early in response to mortality threats at the egg stage. Here we tested how the consequences of life history plasticity, specifically early hatching in response to terrestrial egg predators, depend on the assemblage of aquatic larval predators. We predicted that diverse predator assemblages would impose lower total predation pressure than the most effective single predator species and might thereby reduce the costs of hatching early. We then conducted a mesocosm experiment where we crossed hatchling phenotype (early vs. normal hatching) with five larval-predator environments (no predators, either waterbugs, dragonflies, or mosquitofish singly, or all three predator species together). The consequences of hatching early varied across predator treatments, and tended to disappear through time in some predation treatments, notably the waterbug and diverse predator assemblages. We demonstrate that the fitness costs of life history plasticity in an early life stage depend critically on the predator community composition in the next stage." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/bfc54c34b8bf20e95296df8ff2bf457a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract We used experimental defoliations to examine the effect of leaf age on the timing of leaf shedding in two tropical dry forest trees. Trees of the deciduous Bombacopsis quinata (bombacaceae, a.k.a. Pachira quinata) and the brevi-deciduous Astronium graveolens (anacardiaceae) were manually defoliated for three times during the rainy season. All trees started to produce a new crown of leaves 2 weeks after defoliation, and continued expanding leaves throughout the rainy season. At the transition to the dry season, the experimental groups consisted of trees with known differences in maximum leaf age. Defoliations resulted in declines in stem growth but did not affect the mineral content or water relations of the leaves subsequently produced. There was no effect of leaf age on the timing of leaf abscission in B. quinata. In A. graveolens, the initiation of leaf shedding followed in rank order, the maximum leaf age of the four treatments, but there was substantial coherence among treatments in the major period of leaf abscission such that trees completed leaf shedding at the same time. In the two species, leaf water potential (ΨL) and stomatal conducantce (g S) declined with the onset of the dry season, reaching minimum values of –0.9 MPa in P. quinata and <–2.0 MPa in A. graveolens. Within each species, leaves of different age exhibited similar ΨL and g S at the onset of drought, and then decreased at a similar rate as the dry season progressed. Overall, our study suggests that the environmental factors were more important than leaf age in controlling the timing of leaf shedding." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8c0ef73cbe310f513edf85c5f6ab94f6> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Conclusion The following general conclusions can be drawn on the seasonal variations in the chemical composition of mackerels:—1.The weight of fish varies directly as length.2.The tendency of ash and protein content of mackerel is to remain constant.3.Water and fat are the components of fish which are subject to seasonal variation and have a reciprocal relationship.4.The fat contents in mackerel rise to a maximum between September to November and fall thereafter gradually.5.The average composition as revealed by analysis in the years 1947 to 1949 is shown below:— Water 73·45% Protein 20·95% Fat 3·29% Ash 1·66%" .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/23946614f177abf00a6ba77615ca6760> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The blackmargined aphid,Monellia caryella (Fitch), exhibited a seasonal pattern with early and late peaks of the population in pecan orchards at Newe Ya’ar in the Yizre’el Valley. A similar pattern was not observed at Kibbutz Sede Eliyyahu in the Bet She’an Valley, where there was a single peak, late in the season. The occurrence of natural enemies indicated that spiders and lacewing eggs were the predators most commonly associated with population fluctuations of the aphid. In most cases the rate of increase of the blackmargined aphid was highest late in the season." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/08239e32dee881a7644c64a7e5fbcd74> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Structure of breeding bird communities was compared among four habitat types representative of stages present in most old-field successions in the eastern deciduous forest formation of North America. The successional catagories, defined by vegetational structure, were designated herbaceous (type A habitats) herb, shrub and sapling (type B), young forest (type C), and older forest (type D). Density of breeding birds was lowest in A habitats, rose sharply in B habitats and reached a maximum in D habitats. Species richness and number of feeding guild showed similar patterns. Mean number of species per guilds was highest in D habitats. Generalist feeding guilds were predominant in type A and B habitats, primarily due to the importance of the graminivore-insectivore guild. Specialist guilds increased in importance with succession due to addition of several insectivorous guilds in later successional stages. Patterns of occurrence of individual feeding guilds are analyzed and discussed with respect to changes in vegetational structure. Variance in community structure was generally highest in A habitats and lowest in D habitats; this is discussed in relation to the evolution of “saturated”, coadapted communities." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2d450abaa0ff36214ecc1af71d64ad28> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Ramets from six Solidago altissima clones of known resistance to the stem gallmaker Eurosta solidaginis were grown with and without supplemental nutrients. In a greenhouse experiment, mated female Eurosta were allowed to oviposit in ramets that were subsequently grown through flowering and then harvested to determine biomass allocation. Supplemental nutrients increased plant biomass but did not affect resistance to this gallmaking herbivore. This result does not conform to the plant carbon/nutrient balance hypothesis which predicts that enhanced mineral nutrition will indirectly cause a reduction in carbon-based defensive chemistry. Our results indicate a strong genetic basis to ball gallmaker resistance since modification of host phenotype did not influence susceptibility. We suggest that evaluating the degree of genotypic or environmental control of plant resistance will be especially helpful in clarifying the patterns of defensive chemical responses." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8c56f8a7bb105f93eb78a3c03b0229ba> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Nitrogen is the major growth-limiting nutrient for marine algae. One potential source of nitrogen for marine algae is ammonium released by invertebrates. Many mid-intertidal reefs in northeastern New Zealand are dominated by a close association between the honeycomb barnacle Chamaesipho columna and an encusting brown alga Pseudolithoderma sp. Growth of Pseudolithoderma was enhanced in the presence of live C. columna, which released ammonium at a greater rate than the maximum rate of ammonium uptake by Pseudolithoderma. Algal tissue on barnacle tests had a lower C:N ratio than tissue located more than 2 cm from the nearest barnacle, suggesting the barnacle is an important source of nitrogen for the alga. The role of nutrient exchange in determining ecological patterns of species in marine communities is discussed." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/70226ca0279bb5095c7aa2fbcbd89921> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Se is an environmental concern as it can be toxic if present in high concentrations even though it is a dietary requirement for all animals. Se levels are a special concern in the Fountain Creek Watershed located in southeastern Colorado whose geological source is the Se-rich Pierre Shale. Segments of Fountain Creek have Se water levels that exceed the current EPA limit of 5 µg/l. In the studies described here, the effects of river water containing selenium were examined on fish populations at different sites along the Fountain Creek Watershed. Based on the hypothesis that high levels of Se present in the Creek and resident bryophytes should be an indicator of diversity in the river fish we explored the possibility that the low toxicity of the selenium could be due to speciation. A speciation analysis was conducted to determine the selenium(IV) and selenium(VI). Our results show that sites with higher ratios of the more toxic Se(IV) relative to total selenium exhibit lower fish diversity and number of fish. Our results indicate that factors, other than total Se, such as Se speciation may be involved in controlling the bioavailability and toxicity of this element to aquatic organisms in Fountain Creek." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d6b3978729dc2a3f7edcfdbae4660fc6> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Biotic communities inhabiting collections of insular habitat patches often exhibit compositional patterns described as “nested subsets”. In nested biotas, the assemblages of species in relatively depauperate sites comprise successive subsets of species in relatively richer sites. In theory, nestedness may result from selective extinction, selective colonization, or other mechanisms, such as nested habitats. Allopatric speciation is expected to reduce nestedness. Previous studies, based largely on comparisons between land-bridge and oceanic archipelagos, have emphasized the role of selective extinction. However, colonization could also be important in generating strong patterns of nestedness. We apply a recently published index of nestedness to more than 50 island biogeographic data sets, and examine the roles of colonization, extinction, endemism, and, to a limited extent, habitat variability on the degree on nestedness. Most data sets exhibit a significant degree of nestedness, although there is no general tendency for land-bridge biotas to appear more nested than oceanic ones. Endemic species are shown to generally reduce nestedness. Comparisons between groups of non-endemic species differing in overwater or inter-patch dispersal ability indicate that superior dispersers generally exhibit a greater degree of nestedness than poorer dispersers, a result opposite that expected if colonization were a less predictable process than extinction. These results suggest that frequent colonization is likely to enhance nestedness, thereby increasing the compositional overlap among insular biotas. The prevalence of selective extinction in natural communities remains in question. The importance of colonization in generating and maintaining nested subsets suggests that (1) minimum critical areas will be difficult to determine from patterns of species distributions on islands; (2) multiple conservation sites are likely to be required to preserve communities in subdivided landscapes; and (3) management of dispersal processes may be as important to preserving species and communities as is minimizing extinctions." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/dece50fa1fe5a13b5958d17bcd09325a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Using field and laboratory observations and experiments over 3 years, I investigated whether reproductive trade-offs shape individual life histories in two natural populations of the water strider, Aquarius remigis, in which univoltine and bivoltine life cycles coexist. Both later eclosion dates and food shortages, even after adult eclosion, induced diapause in females, thus deferring reproduction to the following spring. Adult body size was positively affected by food availability during juvenile development. Higher food levels also increased the reproductive output of females, but not their longevity or oviposition period. When compared to spring breeders (univoltine life cycle), direct (summer) breeders (bivoltine life cycle) experienced reduced lifetime egg numbers and longevity, as well as reduced survivorship of their second-summer-generation offspring; these reproductive costs offset, at least in part, the advantage in non-decreasing populations of having two generations per year. Fecundity was correlated with body size, and among summer-generation females direct breeders were larger than non-breeders. The time remaining before the onset of winter and/or the time since adult eclosion augmented cumulative energy uptake, and consequently the lipid reserves and winter survival probability of non-breeding (diapausing) summer adults approaching hibernation. Overwintered spring reproductives died at faster rates than non-reproductive summer individuals despite greater food availability in spring, indicating a mortality cost of reproduction. Body length correlated with absolute and not with proportional lipid content but showed no consistent relationship with survivorship in the field. These results are in agreement with current theory on the evolution of insect voltinism patterns, and further indicate high degrees of life history flexibility (phenotypic plasticity) in the study populations in response to variable environmental factors (notably photoperiod and food availability). This may be related to their location in a geographic transition zone from uni- to bivoltine life cycles." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/fc94307c16eff748f1324ba7969c6557> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Phaedranassa viridiflora (Amaryllidaceae) is an endemic and endangered plant restricted to the Northern Andes in Ecuador. It is known in three locations where it is sympatric with other Phaedranassa species. Phaedranassa viridiflora is the only species of the genus with yellow flowers. We analyzed 13 microsatellite loci to elucidate the genetic structure of the populations of P. viridiflora. Our results provided the first evidence of natural hybridization in the genus (between P. viridiflora and P. dubia in the Pululahua crater of northern Ecuador). The central and southern populations did not show hybridization. Genetic diversity was the highest in the Pululahua population. Central and southern populations have a higher proportion of clones than Pululahua. Bayesian and cluster analysis suggest that the yellow flower type evolved at least three times along the Ecuadorean Andes. In contrast to other Phaedranassa species, Phaedranassa viridiflora shows lower genetic diversity, which is likely related to a vegetative reproductive strategy." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/7d60fb8abed514c151cd5730e21afd04> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract This paper contains an analysis of the communications presented at the World Conference on Marine Biodiversity in Valencia, Spain, November 2008. Our main interest was to determine the current global trends in marine biodiversity research in terms of which areas, ecosystems and functional or taxonomic groups are receiving the most attention from researchers, what countries are actively involved in research in this field, and what networks are being established internationally to foster marine biodiversity research. A total of 236 oral talks and 148 posters were presented at the conference. These were organized in 23 sessions with four major themes linked to marine biodiversity: patterns and processes, ecosystem functioning, changes over time, and conservation policies and societal benefits. Current research seems to be focused mainly on benthic communities, followed by plankton, and to a much lesser extent, sponges, meiobenthos and invertebrates in general. The most studied geographic areas are the Southern Ocean, the Mediterranean, the European Seas and the Antarctic region. Exploration is being carried out mostly in the deep sea and in coastal zones, and focused mainly on topics such as function, communities, distribution, ecology, and secondarily on genetics and climate related issues. The conference had good international representation. The UK, France and the US each contributed more than 50 abstracts; Germany, Spain, Italy, Belgium, Canada, and the Netherlands contributed between 25 to 48 abstracts each. Nearly 40% of the papers and abstracts presented were contributed to or involved two or more countries, which indicates a solid foundation for international collaboration and establishing research networks. The importance of the event for both the scientific community and society at large was discussed including the passing of the Valencia Declaration, a plea for the protection of marine biodiversity." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/05818e5411df81f71a84998486a0212d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Resource selection is a function of interactions of organisms (competition, predation) as well as characteristics of the resource and organisms. I provide a quantitative model that integrates these factors. I use the model to predict profitability of fruits to tropical birds, but the model and its predictions are applicable to a wider array of systems and organisms. Profitability of a fruit is determined by rewards provided by the pericarp (mass and caloric yields) relative to costs (metabolic requirements, handling time, search time, behavioral interference, predator avoidance) associated with finding and eating that fruit (Fig. 1). Fruits increase in profitability with increases in fruit size until increases in handling time offset increases in pericarp mass. The fruit size at which increases in handling time offset increases in pericarp mass varies among bird species due to differences in bill and body size. Decreases in feeding rate due to decreasing numbers of fruits and increasing search time causes reduced profitability and this effect becomes more severe with decreasing fruit size and/or increasing frugivore size. Consequently, as fruit size decreases relative to frugivore size, fruit abundance becomes increasingly important to fruit selection by frugivores. However, while profitability of resources is a function of characteristics of the resources and the organisms, biological interactions can change profitability rankings; resources that may be more profitable in the absence of behavioral interference, exploitation competition, or predation risk can become less profitable in the face of these interactions. The proposed model integrates these interactions to provide predictions of resource selection and these predictions are supported by published studies." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/c0e72bf7f4ebd8ac85b0ff0a1cf65461> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract An investigation into the potential taxonomic value of leaf surface characteristics using large sample size and multivariate analysis was undertaken in Carex section Phacocystis. A case study examined micromorphological characters of the leaf surface for six members of the section in Britain. The six split into three groups based on distribution of stomata: Carex recta amphistomous, C. aquatilis/C. nigra epistomous, and C. bigelowii/C. elata/C. acuta hypostomous. There was considerable variation within samples in stomatal density and cell dimensions. Discriminant Analysis of nine quantitative characters clearly separated four species and a cluster of two species, C. elata and C. acuta. Multivariate analysis indicated that the intercostal cell lengths from both leaf surfaces, abaxial costal cell lengths, and widths of the adaxial costal and abaxial intercostal cells were taxonomically useful in this group and potentially of use within the genus." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ae5ada44ec6a6ecd3ad1f234bff258c9> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Ecosystem climate manipulation experiments (ECMEs) are a key tool for predicting the effects of climate change on ecosystems. However, the strength of inferences drawn from these experiments depends on whether the manipulated conditions mimic future climate changes. While ECMEs have examined mean temperature and moisture conditions, ecosystem processes may respond more to microclimatic thresholds (e.g., freeze–thaw events). We reported the mean and microclimatic thresholds from a post-clearcut ECME in a temperate, mixed deciduous forest. Target treatments were ambient, warmed (+∼2 °C), wetted (+∼20 % precipitation), and warmed + wetted. Wetted treatments increased mean monthly precipitation by 23 %, but did not change the amount of time the soil water potential was below the permanent wilting point. Relative to ambient, warmed treatments increased the mean temperatures of the surface and soil by 1.8 and 2.5 °C, respectively. Warming decreased the number of soil freeze–thaw events and increased the number of growing degree days, frost-free days, and amount of time leaf surface temperatures were in the optimal photosynthetic range. Our results showed that, even when ECMEs mimic mean predicted climate conditions, their effect on microclimatic thresholds can be variable. We suggest that measuring these and other microclimatic thresholds will be essential for interpreting ECME results and assessing their value in predicting ecosystem responses to future climate change." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/67392455e8a4ae7add207346c26637dc> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The effect of stand structure on the diversity of the forest's ground vegetation was examined based on data on permanent sample plots collected in the northern parts of North-Carelia, eastern Finland. Different ordination methods (DCA, GNMDS, LNMDS, and HMDS) were used together with the TWINSPAN classification method. The aim was to construct a basis for classifying forests with respect to the biodiversity of the forest vegetation. Fertility and stand age showed the strongest correlation with the variation in ground vegetation. Other important factors were basal area, tree species composition, and crown cover. These variables were important in the division of the sample plots into different classes. According to the diversity indices, species diversity was at its highest in young stands on fertile forest sites. As a result, twenty-one different classes were formed based on the relative abundance of understorey species. The variables with the highest correlation were used to describe the stand structure in these classes." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/25be190b3097c0b219a3d3970c0047a4> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Fagus engleriana Seem. occurs in the mountains of southern China. It has a multi-stemmed form at several sites, but it is single-stemmed at other sites. It is not known whether this tree naturally develops the multi-stemmed form at all sites of its range. This paper describes the occurrences of multi-stemmed F. engleriana at eight sites that are spread over its range. The clonal structure and stem growth patterns for selected F. engleriana individuals are also given. Our results suggest that F. engleriana is able to develop a multi-stemmed form at all sites of its range. The beech clones examined usually had closed centres, suggesting that they were younger than the Japanese Fagus japonica clones that have open centres. There were usually dominant and suppressed stems within the F. engleriana clones. Often, the dominant and some suppressed stems within a clone were of similar-age and had strong initial stem-radial growth rates. These similar-aged stems probably emerged in a large opening. The suppressed stems usually had radial growth rates that were initially similar to, but later much less than that of the dominant ones. At one site that was intensively studied, decrease of stem growth with increase of stem size was found in the multi-stemmed beech but not in single-stemmed Fagus hayatae Palibin ex Hayata. Both species had comparable initial radial growth rates. At this latter site there were two large peaks in the ages of all F. engleriana stems sampled, suggesting two major disturbances occurred in the past. F. engleriana occurs mainly in the northern part of Chinese Fagus range, where beech seed production is rather low, and in forests where dense bamboo undergrowth restricts establishment and survival of seedlings. Vigorous sprouting is probably beneficial to F. engleriana enabling it to persist in these habitats." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/defdcbc93baf8089a58b24c884c4d883> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Plant growth in northern forest ecosystems is considered to be primarily nitrogen limited. Nitrogen deposition is predicted to change this towards co-limitation/limitation by other nutrients (e.g., phosphorus), although evidence of such stoichiometric effects is scarce. We utilized two forest fertilization experiments in southern Sweden to analyze single and combined effects of nitrogen and phosphorus on the productivity, composition, and diversity of the ground vegetation. Our results indicate that the productivity of forest ground vegetation in southern Sweden is co-limited by nitrogen and phosphorus. Additionally, the combined effect of nitrogen and phosphorus on the productivity was larger than when applied solely. No effects on species richness of any of these two nutrients were observed when applied separately, while applied in combination, they increased species richness and changed species composition, mainly by promoting more mesotrophic species. All these effects, however, occurred only for the vascular plants and not for bryophytes. The tree layer in a forest has a profound impact on the productivity and diversity of the ground vegetation by competing for both light and nutrients. This was confirmed in our study where a combination of nitrogen and high tree basal area reduced cover of the ground vegetation compared to all the other treatments where basal area was lower after stand thinning. During the past decades, nitrogen deposition may have further increased this competition from the trees for phosphorus and gradually reduced ground vegetation diversity. Phosphorus limitation induced by nitrogen deposition may, thus, contribute to ongoing changes in forest ground vegetation." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/7f3e0ccaa926abf091268c4e0682f11a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Larvicidal activity of crude hexane, ethyl acetate, petroleum ether, acetone, and methanol extracts of the leaf of five species of cucurbitaceous plants, Citrullus colocynthis, Coccinia indica, Cucumis sativus, Momordica charantia, and Trichosanthes anguina, were tested against the early fourth instar larvae of Aedes aegypti L. and Culex quinquefasciatus (Say) (Diptera: Culicidae). The larval mortality was observed after 24 h of exposure. All extracts showed moderate larvicidal effects; however, the highest larval mortality was found in petroleum ether extract of C. colocynthis, methanol extracts of C. indica, C. sativus, M. charantia, and acetone extract of T. anguina against the larvae of A. aegypti (LC50 = 74.57, 309.46, 492.73, 199.14, and 554.20 ppm) and against C. quinquefasciatus (LC50 = 88.24, 377.69, 623.80, 207.61, and 842.34 ppm), respectively. The petroleum ether extract of C. colocynthis and methanol extract of M. charantia were more effective than the other extracts. This is an ideal eco-friendly approach for the control of the dengue vector, A. aegypti, and the lymphatic filariasis vector, C. quinquefasciatus." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/0dc13e979bf3bc6d4a7d25ba5de8b8be> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract A methodology for the experimental investigation of rockfall in three-dimensional space is presented in this paper, aiming to assist on-going research of the complexity of a block’s response to impact during a rockfall. An extended laboratory investigation was conducted, consisting of 590 tests with cubical and spherical blocks made of an artificial material. The effects of shape, slope angle and the deviation of the post-impact trajectory are examined as a function of the pre-impact trajectory direction. Additionally, an empirical model is proposed that estimates the deviation of the post-impact trajectory as a function of the pre-impact trajectory with respect to the slope surface and the slope angle. This empirical model is validated by 192 small-scale field tests, which are also presented in this paper. Some important aspects of the three-dimensional nature of rockfall phenomena are highlighted that have been hitherto neglected. The 3D space data provided in this study are suitable for the calibration and verification of rockfall analysis software that has become increasingly popular in design practice." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/badd738e4258d6d52633d5327694a1fc> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Piophila Fallén, 1810 is a genus of small flies composed of two species: Piophila casei (P. casei) (Linnaeus, 1758), worldwide distributed, and Piophila megastigmata (P. megastigmata) McAlpine, 1978, recently referred in the Palaearctic Region, from the Iberian Peninsula. Both species share ecological niche and are very interesting for forensic purposes, since they are present in carrion in advance stages of decay and have been found to be related to human corpses. The immature stages of P. megastigmata have ever been described, so this paper gives the ultrastructural morphologies of all preimaginal stages of P. megastigmata studied by light microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Particular attention is given to pseudocephalon features—antenna, maxillary palps, facial mask, etc.—cephalopharyngeal skeleton, anterior and posterior spiracles, tegumentary sculpturing, and anal division among others. A comparative analysis of the main distinguishing features is made in order to understand how those features evolve along the developmental process, while larvae II and III are morphologically similar to each other, the larva I shows particular features. Larvae of all stages and pupae are easily distinguishable from other Diptera of forensic importance just based on the presence of trichoid sensilla associated to respiratory slits, instead of peristigmatig tufts, as well as on the well-known disposition of anal papillae. The shapes of both dorsal edge at the basal part of mouthhook and dorsal bridge of cephalopharyngeal skeleton, and the tegumental ornamentation may be considered as good features to distinguish the Piophila species, especially for P. megastigmata and P. casei. At the SEM level, shape, number, and arrangement of oral combs, oral ridges, sensilla of maxillary palpus, papillae of anterior spiracle, scales of spiracular field, and posterior spiracles represent good features to distinguish P. megastigmata from P. casei, but further studies will be necessary in West-Paleartic specimens of latter species. The key for identifying third instar larvae of forensically important Piophilidae in the Iberian Peninsula has been updated to include P. megastigmata." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/132eb800071d08d21acff9cc543e2caf> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The relationships between physicochemical parameters of majority components of Eucalyptus essential oils and their insecticide effect were evaluated on Aedes aegypti (L.) (Diptera: Culicidae). The octanol–water partition coefficients of the monoterpenes were estimated by the atom/fragment contribution method and the vapor pressures were determined by our laboratory in previous studies. The larvicidal activity (LC50 (ppm)) and knockdown effect (KT50 (min)) of each component was determined. The results show that the toxicity of EOs main components of Eucalyptus on adults and larvae of A. aegypti is strongly related to their physicochemical properties (vapor pressure and Log P). However, the interaction of both variables (vapor pressure * Log P) explains the toxicological phenomenon more precisely. The regression models were expressed as follows: KT 50(min) =  − 10.9 + 3.7 * Log P + 1.9 * 1/Pvapor (R2 = 0.80; F = 42.5) and LC 50(ppm) =  − 94.3 + 438.6 *  1/Log P + 2.8 *  1/Pvapor (F = 57.8; R2 = 0.85). The six evaluated components present different functional groups. Therefore, it was considered to evaluate the monoterpenes as a group and separated in two groups: oxygenated monoterpenes (α-terpineol, 4-terpineol, and 1,8-cineole) and terpene hydrocarbons (γ-terpinene, p-cymene, and α-pinene). The results show the regression models for each group as follows: (A) oxygenated terpenes: KT 50(min) = − 515.3 + 1613.2 ∗ 1/Log P + 5, 2 ∗ 1/Pvapor (F = 3176.7 R2 = 0.99) and LC 50(ppm)  =  − 1679.4 + 5402.1 ∗ 1/Log P + 12.7 ∗  1/Pvapor (F = 282.9; R2 = 0.99). (B) Hydrocarbons terpenes: KT 50(min) = 18.2 − 58.3 * 1/Log P + 2.7 * 1/Pvapor (F = 171.7;  R2 = 0.97) and LC 50(ppm) = − 21.1 + 174.9 ∗ 1/Log P − 14.3 ∗ 1/Pvapor (F = 410.0; R2 = 0.99). The association between the toxic effect of the evaluated monoterpenes against A. aegypti and the physicochemical properties can be better described when they are separated into functional groups (hydrocarbons vs. oxygenated terpenes)." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/0066aa9566cbdedccd6507c0414dc30f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract This paper reviews various forestry practices in Jilin Province, China. The authors emphasize the rich natural diversity of Jilin and the need to focus research efforts on understanding the potential of native species to meet the needs of land-management agencies involved in forest resource exploitation and ecological restoration. The native species of China hold great potential, and deserve more research attention, for meeting these needs. The introduction and testing of exotic species should be done only under rigorous scientific testing and after comparison with native species prior to operational introduction into forestry in order to avoid unwanted ecological consequences, including potential problems with alien invasives and pest introductions. The authors also emphasize the need to maintain viable (e.g., genetically diverse and reproductively fit) natural populations of native species in order to protect China's valuable natural diversity and maintain the potential of native species to function as future seed sources for local forest and ecological restoration activities." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e78c3dddd2fdd44681e0db67268bd2e4> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Most models of theoretical population ecology consider population density as a state variable and thus ignore the fact that populations are composed not of identical average individuals but of individuals which are usually different. However, this individual variability may be important for population regulation. We therefore analysed an individual-based population model which explicitly describes within-generation processes, i.e. individual growth, starvation, and resource dynamics. The results show that if population dynamics are dominated by slow changes in resource level, the population size in the model undergoes wide oscillation, often leading to extinction. If, on the other hand, fast within-generation processes predominate, such as starvation and sudden drops in resource levels, the population fluctuates to a limited extent around an average. Within-generation density dependence may thus be an important mechanism which is largely ignored in classic time-discrete state-variable models. We conclude that the individual-based approach provides important insights into the hierarchical organization of population dynamics, i.e. the relationship between fast processes at the individual level and slower processes at the population level." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/3c36fbda0062415d6f62a6bff37f9084> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Climate change is expected to alter the distribution of habitats and thus the distribution of species connected with these habitats in the terrestrial Barents Sea region. It was hypothesised that wild species connected with the tundra and open-land biome may be particularly at risk as forest area expands. Fourteen species of birds were identified as useful indicators for the biodiversity dependent upon this biome. By bringing together species distribution information with the LPJ-GUESS vegetation model, and with estimates of future wild and domestic reindeer density, potential impacts on these species between the present time and 2080 were assessed. Over this period there was a net loss of open land within the current breeding range of most bird species. Grazing reindeer were modelled as increasing the amount of open land retained for nine of the tundra bird species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/044c7a99fa542f1210b3e53f7b650de5> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Consumer biomass and spatial distribution in the equatorial alkaline-saline Lake Nakuru were studied from 1972–1976. These data will provide the basis for estimating feeding and production rates and for quantifying energy flow at the consumer level. Two of the main consumers, the Lesser Flamingo (Phoeniconaias minor) and the Soda Tilapia (Sarotherodon alcalicus grahami), were covered by earlier papers. The biomass of the only planktonic crustacean, the copepod Lovenula (=Paradiaptomus) africana was very high (1.5 gDW (dry weight)·m-3, mean in 1972/73) in comparison with other tropical lakes. Lovenula was absent in 1974 and 1975, and at very low levels (0.1–0.4 gDW·m-3) in part of 1976. Among the rotifers Brachionus dimidiatus dominated in 1972/73 (≈0.2 gDW· m-3), but was outnumbered by B. plicatilis throughout most of 1974 to 1976 (mean total rotifer biomass 1.4 gDW· m-3, peak densities 7 gDW·m-3); during high salinity periods (>20‰) Hexarthra jenkinae occurred in very low numbers. For short periods rotifers can be the dominant species of L. Nakuru. Aquatic heteroptera (four species) played a minor role: they contributed 0.4% to total consumer biomass in 1972/73; in 1974–1976 the lake had no aquatic heteroptera. Benthic biomass (0.4 gDW·m-2) was within the range of other tropical lakes, it consisted almost exclusively of Leptochironomus deribae. Bird counts of the twelve most important species are given for the years 1972–1974: Pelecanus onocrotalus accounts for ≈90% of the biomass (0.44 gDW·m-3, mean 1972/73) with peak densities of almost 20,000 birds.-The consumer organisms covered by this and the two preceding papers represent >99% of L. Nakuru's consumer biomass. Population dynamics of various consumer species are discussed." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f90c865c6f7b4e31301af5daec5062eb> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The phytoplankton genus Phaeocystis has well-documented, spatially and temporally extensive blooms of gelatinous colonies; these are associated with release of copious amounts of dimethyl sulphide (an important climate-cooling aerosol) and alterations of material flows among trophic levels and export from the upper ocean. A potentially salient property of the importance of Phaeocystis in the marine ecosystem is its physiological capability to transform between solitary cell and gelatinous colonial life cycle stages, a process that changes organism biovolume by 6–9 orders of magnitude, and which appears to be activated or stimulated under certain circumstances by chemical communication. Both life-cycle stages can exhibit rapid, phased ultradian growth. The colony skin apparently confers protection against, or at least reduces losses to, smaller zooplankton grazers and perhaps viruses. There are indications that Phaeocystis utilizes chemistry and/or changes in size as defenses against predation, and its ability to create refuges from biological attack is known to stabilize predator–prey dynamics in model systems. Thus the life cycle form in which it occurs, and particularly associated interactions with viruses, determines whether Phaeocystis production flows through the traditional “great fisheries” food chain, the more regenerative microbial food web, or is exported from the mixed layer of the ocean. Despite this plethora of information regarding the physiological ecology of Phaeocystis, fundamental interactions between life history traits and system ecology are poorly understood. Research summarized here, and described in the various papers in this special issue, derives from a central question: how do physical (light, temperature, particle distributions, hydrodynamics), chemical (nutrient resources, infochemistry, allelopathy), biological (grazers, viruses, bacteria, other phytoplankton), and self-organizational mechanisms (stability, indirect effects) interact with life-cycle transformations of Phaeocystis to mediate ecosystem patterns of trophic structure, biodiversity, and biogeochemical fluxes? Ultimately the goal is to understand and thus predict why Phaeocystis occurs when and where it does, and the bio-feedbacks between this keystone species and the multitrophic level ecosystem." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/5cfd6976b2222f68288f8849ff6e12b7> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract In order to correctly interpret field data related to bioindicators, laboratory experiments were carried out to study 106Ru accumulation and release by mosses, as a function of experimental procedures and conditions, aimed to reproduce ecological realities. Mosses were exposed to 106Ru during 5 to 7 days and then transferred to an inactive, daily-renewed medium. Results were expressed mathematically by a sum of two exponential functions for fixation, which was shown to be a two-phase rapid and intense phenomenon, and by a simple exponential function for elimination, which was slower and regular. Three rhythms of contaminant release were simulated, and they were found to have little effect on fixation extent as measured by concentration factor, while the speed of fixation was affected slightly. Accumulation was also studied under two opposite seasons, simulated by modifying temperature, illumination and daylight period. It occured with very different kinetics, suggesting an important intervention of adsorption processes, whose speed is conditioned by temperature. This hypothesis was supported by the considerable effect the size of the exchange surface had on extent and speed of fixation, shown by comparison of accumulation in two species. Nevertheless, reduced uptake in darkness indicated the probable role of physiological processes. As far as desorption is concerned, the studied factors had little effect. The most significant differences in retention were due to the previous average exposure time and to exchange surface size." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f349dd51c2e20c8086d5070d806073e2> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Data from 11 pop-up archival transmitting tags attached to opah (Lampris guttatus, F. Lampridae) in the central North Pacific between November 2003 and March 2005 were used to describe their vertical movement and habitat. In the subtropical gyre northwest of the Hawaiian Islands, opah generally inhabited a 50–400 m depth range and 8–22°C temperatures. They were frequently found in depths of 50–150 m at night and in greater depths (100–400 m) during the day, but were constantly moving vertically within this broad range. At night, excursions below 200 m were not uncommon and during the day they were very likely to spend some time at depths <175 m. Their vertical speeds were generally <25 cm s−1 but on one occasion an opah descended at a burst speed of 4 m s−1. Vertical habitat use by individual opah apparently varied with local oceanographic conditions, but over a 24-h period the average temperature experienced was always in the narrow range of 14.7 to 16.5°C." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/53c4151641b4d4a24fb0aab95eeb887f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Octocorals are characterized by pinnate tentacles and internal sclerites. Their feeding ability is determined by the morphological features of the polyps. Capture of their food by these corals is also affected by the flexibility of the colony, which in turn is determined by the features of the sclerites. We studied the morphological features of two azooxanthellate octocorals, Dendronephthya hemprichi and D. sinaiensis, whose depth distribution partially overlaps at Eilat (northern Red Sea). Following Gause’s Law, such coexistence is considered to be possible if each species is adapted to utilize different food items. In order to examine this Law, the features of the polyps of the two species and their sclerites were studied. Each side of their tentacles displays 11–13 pinnules, which are longer at the tentacles’ distal end compared to its median section and proximal end, with the distal pinnules of D. sinaiensis being longer than those of D. hemprichi. At the proximal end of the tentacles of D. sinaiensis, the pinnules emerge perpendicularly, unlike in D. hemprichi, where they emerge from the lateral sides; the distance between the rows of pinnules is, therefore, shorter for the former. These findings imply that the filtered phytoplankton by the two species may differ in size. Their sclerites also differ in size and shape, and therefore the expansion and contraction abilities of their polyps also differ, and may thus affect their respective feeding abilities. The findings indicate that D. hemprichi and D. sinaiensis are adapted to utilize different food items, and therefore support Gause’s Law and explain the coexistence of the two species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e31f33b2cd14675aba11080eec466e68> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract While there have been many reports of the species ‘Berkeleya scopulorum’ from Northeast Asia mainly as Navicula scopulorum, the observation of the living specimen of the species has revealed that the species should be the member of the genus Climaconeis. Here we describe the species as Climaconeis mabikii sp. nov. based on microscopic observations by means of both light (LM) and scanning electron microscope (SEM). As part of the review, the regional distribution of C. mabikii as well as the worldwide biogeography of the taxa belonging to the genus Climaconeis are discussed. Newly described C. mabikii from the present study is the seventeenth member of the genus. The discovery of the true identity of the diatom identified for a long time as ‘Berkeleya scopulorum’ and its description as a new Climaconeis species contributes to the proper appreciation of the diversity of the Northeast Asian diatom assemblage and fills old gaps in the published records." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/1242cb6c946e54bd18813e87de68023b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract. Nutritional provisioning is a critical component of life history strategies, and of particular interest in social insect colonies because of the role that division of labor plays in resource allocation. To explore the mechanisms that underlie colony nutritional strategies, I examined three populations of the ant Pheidole morrisi across a gradient of overwinter food scarcity over two seasons. P. morrisi colonies were found to employ amixed strategy of fat storage with regard to a longer overwinter period: members of both worker castes increase their percent-fat in a graded manner, while the proportion of a specialized subcaste of majors known as “repletes”, also increased within the colony. Geographic variation in other colony traits such as mean colony size, mean worker size, and minor/major caste ratio were also found, although not always in a manner clearly relating to fat storage. These results indicate that colony demography responds to seasonal fluctuations in food availability through behavioral alterations (increased fat stores and recruitment of replete workers) rather than physical alterations (changes in lean body sizes or caste ratio). The findings illustrate the dynamic role division of labor plays in the success of insect colonies confronting environmental variability." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e4eb4581d7d7676e680ffef816a27647> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract BackgroundThe Western Ghats of India are known to be a major biological hotspot that supports plant diversity and endemism. On the Kas Plateau, a lateritic plateau of the northern Western Ghats, we examined mesoscale distributions of endemic, rare, or locally significant plant species in forest habitats or on the plateau and its escarpments, and assessed the edaphic and hydrological parameters of seasonal plateau microhabitats. FindingsAlmost two thirds of over 100 phytogeographically significant species occur on the plateau top; these represent 26 plant families and 43 genera. About 80% of the species are restricted to the upper plateau and its escarpments. ConclusionSince botanically critical plateau habitats are generally small, dependent on seasonal monsoon moisture, and determined by drainage-related parameters that can be altered by anthropogenic activities, they are highly vulnerable. Maintenance of appropriate microhabitats should be a key consideration for conservation of regionally significant plant biota." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/52b366d4ca2e6cbeb8749a86041a5c8f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Diurnal and seasonal trends in net photosynthetic rate (P N), stomatal conductance (g), transpiration rate (E), vapour pressure deficit, temperature, photosynthetic photon flux density, and water use efficiency (WUE) were compared in a two-year-old Dalbergia sissoo and Hardwickia binata plantation. Mean daily maximum P N in D. sissoo ranged from 21.40±2.60 µmol m−2 s−1 in rainy season I to 13.21±2.64 µmol m−2 s−1 in summer whereas in H. binata it was 20.04±1.20 µmol m−2 s−1 in summer and 13.64±0.16 µmol m−2 s−1 in winter. There was a linear relationship between daily maximum P N and g s in D. sissoo but there was no strong linear relationship between P N and g s in H. binata. In D. sissoo, the reduction in g s led to a reduction in both P N and E enabling the maintenance of WUE during dry season thereby managing unfavourable environmental conditions efficiently whereas in H. binata, an increase in g s causes an increase of P N and E with a significant moderate WUE." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ed4a823164e4e284527eeb94a7e02407> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Restoration of mangroves is often considered a way to minimize losses incurred from their decline and to provide additional services to coastal communities. However, the success of restoration programs is often focused on biological or ecological criteria. The situation is no exception in Bangladesh, which houses the world’s largest mangrove plantations. This study has been undertaken in a south-central estuarine island (Nijhum Dwip) of the Bangladesh coast and aims to understand societal perception on the achievements of a plantation program. Through 110 household interviews and seven group discussions, an assessment was conducted of peoples’ perception about major flora and fauna of the mangrove ecosystem, benefits derived from the forest, present condition of the forest, causes of degradation, and ways to improve the situation. Around one-fourth of the respondents mentioned that they were highly dependent on the ecosystem. The most important perceived benefits were: provision of raw materials, prevention against natural disasters, climate regulation and soil retention. However, the majority (>80%) of the respondents perceived the ecosystem to be degrading. Encroachment and illicit felling were identified as the main causes of such degradation. In order to arrest the continued degradation allowed by conventional forest management flaws, adaptive co-management has been recommended to conserve this ecosystem in a more equitable way." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/43b9c4051f3b4be29ada2e9c6728ff7d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The concept of a common mycorrhizal network implies that the arrangement of plants and mycorrhizal fungi in a community shares properties with other networks. A network is a system of nodes connected by links. Here we apply network theory to mycorrhizas to determine whether the architecture of a potential common mycorrhizal network is random or scale-free. We analyzed mycorrhizal data from an oak woodland from two perspectives: the phytocentric view using trees as nodes and fungi as links and the mycocentric view using fungi as nodes and trees as links. From the phytocentric perspective, the distribution of potential mycorrhizal links, as measured by the number of ectomycorrhizal morphotypes on trees of Quercus garryana, was random with a short tail, implying that all the individuals of this species are more or less equal in linking to fungi in a potential network. From the mycocentric perspective, however, the distribution of plant links to fungi was scale-free, suggesting that certain fungus species may act as hubs with frequent connections to the network. Parallels exist between social networks and mycorrhizas that suggest future lines of study on mycorrhizal networks." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/281fab69447d309d2609e51f52203520> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Vermetids significantly contribute to the features of certain intertidal reefs. In the eastern Mediterranean, notably along exposed shores of Israel, these reefs are large eolianite platforms divided into rimmed flat basins. Their surfaces are incrusted by a dense cover of vermetid shells cemented by coralline algae—the rims by a crust of Dendropoma petraeum, 10–15 cm thick, and the surrounded basins by Vermetus triquetrus, usually less than 5 cm thick. These two species live in very different environments—the rims are incessantly surfswept and often exposed to air while the basins are usually watercovered and relatively calm. Accordingly, Dendropoma differs from Vermetus in certain morphological and anatomical characters, as well as in feeding mechanisms. There is circumstantial evidence that their crust has a protective effect on the underlying rock and is the controlling factor in the development of these platforms. Less common and smaller vermetid-covered reefs of the Israeli shore are circular limestone formations, in which an outer rim incrusted by D. petraeum surrounds a single shallow basin incrusted by V. triquetrus. These small reefs, resembling miniature atolls, show superficial similarity to intertidal reefs in Bermuda, where certain environmental conditions are rather similar to those prevailing in the eastern Mediterranean. As in Israel, a species of Dendropoma, D. irregulare, is an important component in the composition of the reefs, though there is no Vermetus. Also, coralline algae do not function just as cement but are a significant component. Both in Israel and in Bermuda such reefs develop when erosion, brought about by the encroaching sea, is hindered by the protective biogenetic crust. In Israel this crust never increases in thickness beyond a certain level because by the time the rising sea-level permits further upward growth, the reef has already collapsed under the combined action of boring organisms and waves. In Bermuda, voids and borings within the reef are rapidly filled-in and cemented, mainly by transported calcareous debris. Instead of borers and waves weakening it, the Bermudan reef is consolidated and does not readily collapse, and the thickness of its organic crust is remarkable. Thus, the Bermudan “microatolls” are genuine wave-resistant reefs. Their growth is initiated and perpetuated by vermetids and coralline algae. Though a large portion of their framework is removed, it is replaced by a secondary deposition and cementation of other lime-secreting organisms and debris." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b259c9070639460b1f60d28192f1370b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Coral predation by the fireworm Hermodice carunculata was investigated by presenting settlers (<3-week-old) and adults of two species of Caribbean corals, Montastraea faveolata and Agaricia humilis, to three different size classes of fireworms under laboratory conditions. For both coral species, survival rates of settlers were low (<2 % after 4 days), intermediate (42–54 %) and high (>90 %) in the presence of small-, mid- and large-sized fireworms, respectively. In contrast, fireworms hardly preyed on adult corals, irrespective of their sizes. Our results suggest an ontogenic shift in the diet of H. carunculata and in the susceptibility of corals to predation by fireworms. H. carunculata, in particular small-sized individuals, could be an important cause for early post-settlement mortality in corals. The corallivore could reinforce recruitment bottlenecks and reduce coral recovery after disturbances." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/00d08e142b2b0f2754dad20463117605> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Conclusions It appears that the fingerlings of goldfish and carp were unsuitable hosts, which did not promote the normal development of the worms including their reproductive maturity. Further investigations are currently in progress using larger fish as experimental hosts and additional species of Acanthocephala." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/1c5790390820b4c11069d500155408e1> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The pyralid Mussidia nigrivenella, a pest of cotton, maize and Phaseolus bean in West Africa, has never been reported as a crop pest in East and Southern Africa, although reportedly it exists in the wild. It is hypothesized that the difference in pest status of M. nigrivenella between western and eastern Africa was either due to differences in natural enemy compositions or that there exist several populations and/or species of Mussidia, which vary in their host plant range. Thus, a catalogue of parasitoids of Mussidia spp. was established through surveys in mid-altitude and coastal Kenya, between 2006 and 2007. Mussidia spp. eggs, larvae and pupae were collected from fruits of plants known to host Mussidia spp. and were examined for parasitoid-related mortality. The trichogrammatid Trichogrammatoidea sp. nr. lutea was obtained from eggs of Mussidia fiorii. A braconid egg-larval parasitoid, Phanerotoma sp., was reared from the larvae of unknown species of Mussidia (which we are referring to as Mussidia “madagascariensis”, Mussidia “quanzensis”) and M. fiorii, while the bethylid Goniozus sp. and the braconid Apanteles sp. were obtained from Mussidia nr. nigrivenella. Moreover, the ichneumonid larval parasitoid Syzeuctus sp. was obtained from M. fiorii, while the tachinid Leskia sp. was obtained from Mussidia “madagascariensis”. Overall, mortality caused by parasitoids was negligible; hence they were not considered key mortality factors in the population dynamics of the Mussidia spp. in Kenya." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/57a5cebe6cff9e72c212447402f6d2b6> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Tricholoma matsutake is an ectomycorrhizal basidiomycete that associates with Pinaceae in the Northern Hemisphere and produces prized “matsutake” mushrooms. We questioned whether the symbiont could associate with a birch that is an early-successional species in boreal, cool-temperate, or subalpine forests. In the present study, we demonstrated that T. matsutake can form typical ectomycorrhizas with Betula platyphylla var. japonica; the associations included a Hartig net and a thin but distinct fungal sheath, as well as the rhizospheric mycelial aggregate “shiro” that is required for fruiting in nature. The in vitro shiro also emitted a characteristic aroma. This is the first report of an ectomycorrhizal formation between T. matsutake and a deciduous broad-leaved tree in the boreal or cool-temperate zones that T. matsutake naturally inhabits." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8502286b2466054577a5022495ff0647> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Samples taken in the northern North Sea with the Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR), the Undulating Oceanographic Recorder (UOR) and the Longhurst-Hardy Plankton Recorder (LHPR) during the Fladen Ground Experiment in 1976 (FLEX 76) are used to describe the vertical distribution and population dynamics of Thysanoessa inermis (Krøyer) and to provide estimates of the production and carbon budget of the population from 19th March to 3 June 1976. Spawning occurred in late April and early May, in near synchronisation with the start of the spring bloom of phytoplankton. Eggs, nauplii and calyptopes reached maximum abundance in succession, and furciliae were numerous when sampling ceased in early June. Adults increased in length from a mean of 12.1 mm in mid-March to 17.5 mm in early June and the estimated production was 2.40 mg m-3 over the 74 d period. Total carbon ingested by the population of T. inermis was estimated to be 10 mg C m-2 d-1 in the upper 100m which was only 1.5% of the daily primary production of 0.68 gC m-2 measured over the FLEX period 26 March to 4 June 1976. The grazing by T. inermis on the phytoplankton population was assumed to have little effect on the control and depletion of the spring phytoplankton bloom during FLEX 77." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/25d1d8f57442ba224067243c80e4e550> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Macrophytes can structure biological assemblages in subtropical lakes. Zooplankton often uses them as a refuge, but in the absence of predators many species frequently avoid them. It is hypothesized that plant exudates can act as “repellent factors” because they can be detrimental to the animals’ life history. This work aimed to test both assumptions: whether exudates of two free-floating species, Eichhornia crassipes and Salvinia biloba, repel the cladoceran Ceriodaphnia dubia and whether they affect its life history. Furthermore, given the possibility that increasing temperatures can modify the observed responses, the experimental research was carried out at two temperature levels: 21 and 25 (±1) °C. First, an avoidance experiment was performed inside narrow aquaria containing the plants, so that repellence was analyzed according to the location of animals after 30, 60 and 90 min. Second, for the life cycle experiments, cladocerans were raised in macrophyte-conditioned water and their lifespan, growth and reproduction were daily monitored. Macrophytes’ exudates effectively repelled C. dubia and affected its life history by decreasing its life expectancy, increasing the age at first reproduction and lowering the number of eggs per female. The magnitude of such effects depended on the treatment, i.e. both plants together caused more negative effects than E. crassipes alone, and this latter was more negative than S. biloba. At higher temperature, the negative effects were intensified but C. dubia maintained the same order of sensitivity to each treatment. This suggests that temperature variations, within a tolerance range, do not alter the allelopathic interactions between the studied species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ca53f5dd86b1f7271fefbebbf4f96208> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The use of nature areas as an effective tool for conservation of streams and their biota is a relatively unexplored option in urban stream management. Benthic macroinvertebrates and water quality in an urban stream, Poplar Creek, were monitored along a continuum within and downstream of a forest preserve in the western Chicago metropolitan area, USA. Taxa richness and a benthic macroinvertebrate index of biological integrity (MIBI) increased as the stream progressed within the preserve, but percentage of Ephemeroptera, Trichoptera, and Plecoptera (%EPT) showed no improvement. Reductions in the amount of silt substrates and increases in gravel-dominated substrate were evident at sites within the preserve. There were no improvements in water-quality measures tested although trends may have been obscured by precipitation events between sampling occasions. The benefits in stream quality attained within the forest preserve extended beyond the downstream border of the preserve and were not diminished by the presence of a railway, which bisected the stream. The nature preserve provided an opportunity for increased macroinvertebrate biodiversity, likely through local reductions in impervious surfaces and improvements in stream substrate, despite lack of evidence that it improved water quality." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/3d324950d9b241696e02ea8853bc4576> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Invasive plants exhibit both direct and indirect negative effects on recruitment of natives following invasion. We examined indirect effects of the invader Bromus tectorum (cheatgrass) on seed fates of two native grass species, Elymus elymoides and Pseudoroegneria spicata, by removing B. tectorum and by adding inoculum of the shared seed pathogen Pyrenophora semeniperda in factorial experiments at xeric and mesic field sites. We also included a supplemental watering treatment to increase emergence and also the potential for pathogen escape. We recorded emergence and survival of native seedlings and also determined the fate of unemerged seeds. At the xeric site, Pyrenophora-caused mortality was high (34 %), and effects of other pathogens and failed emergence of germinants were smaller. Cheatgrass removal negatively affected both emergence (35 vs. 25 %) and spring survival (69 vs. 42 %). Pyrenophora-caused seed mortality increased with inoculum augmentation for both species (22 vs. 47 % overall), but emergence was negatively impacted only for P. spicata (20 vs. 34 %). At the mesic site, Pyrenophora-caused mortality was low (6 %). Cheatgrass removal doubled emergence (26 vs. 14 %). Seed mortality increased significantly with inoculum augmentation for P. spicata (12 vs. 5 %) but not E. elymoides, while emergence was not significantly affected in either species. A large fraction of seeds produced germinants that failed to emerge (37 %), while another large fraction (35 %) was killed by other pathogens. We conclude that facilitation by cheatgrass at the xeric site but interference at the mesic site was probably mediated through litter effects that could be ameliorative or suppressive. Apparent competition between cheatgrass and native grasses could occur through Pyrenophora, especially in a xeric environment, but effects were weak or absent at emergence. This was probably because Pyrenophora attacks the same slow-germinating fraction that is subject to pre-emergence mortality from other causes, including attack by other pathogens such as Fusarium." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2c86393ed13d0619d05b33fdf67545d1> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary In 1997 and 1998, we investigated the habitat use of Red-backed Shrikes breeding on farmland in Carinthia, southern Austria. We devised an objective census technique to obtain relative measures of shrike abundance and habitat coverage along 35 1 km transect belts, 60 m in width, positioned randomly throughout an area of 100 1 km squares. Shrike abundance was related to habitat variables by means of general linear models. Bivariate models suggested that Red-backed Shrikes were positively associated with grassland grazed by livestock, fence-lines and scattered trees and shrubs, but negatively associated with arable land and grassland that was not grazed. A model constructed with the help of forward selection indicated that shrike abundance was most strongly associated with a mixture of grazed grassland and scrub. Shrike abundance increased with grazed grassland cover. When the cover of grazed grassland was kept constant, shrike abundance increased with scrub cover up to between 10 % and 15 % cover, and declined thereafter. We tested the validity of the model using data from a further 20 transects, collected in 1998. The number of shrikes predicted under the model was significantly positively correlated with the number of shrikes recorded." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9dc15bcda9a300bbe4d806502b97f1d9> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract.  The azooxanthellate octocoral Dendronephthya hemprichi (Octocorallia, Alcyonacea) is the most abundant benthic organism inhabiting the under-water surfaces of oil jetties at Eilat (Red Sea); however, it is very rare on Eilat’s natural reefs. This soft coral exhibits a newly discovered mode of clonal propagation that results in autotomy of small-sized fragments (2–5 mm in length). They possess specialized root-like processes that enable a rapid attachment onto the substrata. An autotomy event is completed within only 2 days; large colonies can bear hundreds of pre-detached fragments. Temporal fluctuations in the percentage of fragment-bearing colonies indicate that autotomy is stimulated by exogenous factors, probably flow-related events. Recruitment of fragments onto PVC plates placed horizontally adjacent to D. hemprichi colonies, was immediate and remarkably high. Attached fragments were observed 2 days after placement of plates; after 52 days, densities of more than one recruit per cm2 were recorded. The negative buoyancy of fragments causes them to land on horizontal surfaces rather than on vertical ones. However, their survivorship on vertical surfaces is much higher. This pattern corresponds with dominance of D. hemprichi on vertical substrata at the oil jetties and on natural vertical reefs of the northern Red Sea. Such a mode of clonal propagation provides an efficient mean for genets of D. hemprichi to exploit food resources within a zooxanthellate-dominated reef community." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/c512a66293de456a82931f0ac8d4935c> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract In the Chihuahuan Desert of the southwestern United States we monitored responses of both winter and summer annual plant communities to natural environmental variation and to experimental removal of seed-eating rodents and ants for 13 years. Analyses of data on population densities of the species by principal component analysis (PCA) followed by repeated measures analysis of variance (rmANOVA) on PCA scores showed that: (1) composition of both winter and summer annual communities varied substantially from year to year, presumably in response to interannual climatic variation, and (2) community composition of winter annuals was also significantly affected by the experimental manipulations of seed-eating animals, but the composition of the summer annual community showed no significant response to these experimental treatments. Canonical discriminant analysis (CDA) was then applied to the data for winter annuals to more clearly identify the responses to the different classes of experimental manipulations. This analysis showed that removing rodents or ants or both taxa caused distinctive changes in species composition. There was a tendency for large-seeded species to increase on rodent removal plots and to decrease on ant removal plots, and for small-seeded species to change in the opposite direction. In the winter annual community there was a significant time x treatment interaction: certain combinations of species that responded differently to removal of granivores also showed opposite fluctuations in response to long-term climatic variation. The large year-to-year variation in the summer annual community was closely and positively correlated across all experimental treatments. The use of multivariate analysis in conjunction with long-term monitoring and experimental manipulation shows how biotic interactions interact with variation in abiotic conditions to affect community dynamics." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4c67751d3dd71f5ad722ad9d0cd467d0> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Litsea szemaois (Lauraceae) is an endemic and endangered species from the tropical rain forests of Xishuangbanna, southern Yunnan, SW China, but habitat fragmentation, especially exacerbated by rubber planting, has caused a decline in population size of the species. AFLP and ISSR were used to investigate the genetic diversity and population structure of eight populations from across its known distribution. Three AFLP and ten ISSR primer combinations produced a total of 203 and 77 unambiguous and repeatable bands respectively, of which 164 (80.8%) and 67 (87.0%) were polymorphic for the two markers. These two markers showed that Litsea szemaois exhibits comparatively high genetic diversity at species level (heterozygosity (hs) = 0.2109) relative to some other Lauraceae. Most of the genetic variation was partitioned within populations, but genetic differentiation between populations was significant and relatively high (Φ st = 0.2420, θB = 0.1986) compared with other tropical plants. The genetic characteristics of L. szemaois may be related to its outbreeding system, insect pollination and fragmented distribution. Because L. szemaois is dioecious and slow to mature, ex situ conservation across its genetic diversity is unlikely to succeed, although seedlings grow well under cultivation. Thus, in situ conservation is very important for this endangered species, especially as only 133 adult individuals are known in the wild. In particular, the Nabanhe and Mandian populations should be given a high conservation priority due to their higher genetic diversity, larger population size and better field condition, but wider sampling is required across all populations to determine additional areas with significant genetic conservation value." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4940497bac56860db58774cb2bbc43e7> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The giving-up density framework is an elegant and widely adopted mathematical approach to measuring animals’ foraging decisions at non-replenishing artificial resource patches. Under this framework, an animal should “give up” when the benefits of foraging are outweighed by the costs (e.g., predation risk, energetic, and/or missed opportunity costs). However, animals of many species may forage in groups, and group size is expected to alter perceived predation risk and hence influence quitting decisions. Yet, most giving-up density studies assume either that individuals forage alone or that giving-up densities are not affected by group foraging. For animals that forage both alone and in groups, differences in giving-up densities due to group foraging rather than experimental variables may substantially alter interpretation. However, no research to date has directly investigated how group foraging affects the giving-up density. We used remote-sensing cameras to identify instances of group foraging in two species of Rattus across three giving-up density experiments to determine whether group foraging influences giving-up densities. Both Rattus species have been observed to vary between foraging alone and in groups. In all three experiments, solo foragers left higher giving-up densities on average than did group foragers. This result has important implications for studies using giving-up densities to investigate perceived risk, the energetic costs of searching, handling time, digestion, and missed opportunity costs, particularly if groups of animals are more likely to experience certain experimental treatments. It is critically important that future giving-up density studies consider the effects of group foraging." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d46e08b6602b23e3b9e4b577f076f82c> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Not much is known about the extreme conditions of urban temperature in tropical cities. Also, the concept, heat-island has been hardly related to the other climatic parameters that have some links with temperature. In view of the points mentioned above, this study examined the maximum temperature records as well as the conditions of temperature at 1000 and 1600 Local Zone Time (LZT). The results revealed that for the humid tropical city of Ibadan, heat islands was best indicated by the minimum temperature. Also, some level of relationship was found to exist between heat island and urban/rural difference in potential evaporation." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/008bf2b87b82b14746555ba3a246cb01> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract It is predicted that locust outbreaks will occur more frequently under future climate change scenarios, with consequent effects on ecological goods and services. A field manipulative experiment was conducted to examine the responses of gross ecosystem productivity (GEP), net ecosystem carbon dioxide (CO2) exchange (NEE), ecosystem respiration (ER), and soil respiration (SR) to locust outbreaks in a temperate steppe of northern China from 2010 to 2011. Two processes related to locust outbreaks, natural locust feeding and carcass deposition, were mimicked by clipping 80 % of aboveground biomass and adding locust carcasses, respectively. Ecosystem carbon (C) exchange (i.e., GEP, NEE, ER, and SR) was suppressed by locust feeding in 2010, but stimulated by locust carcass deposition in both years (except SR in 2011). Experimental locust outbreaks (i.e., clipping plus locust carcass addition) decreased GEP and NEE in 2010 whereas they increased GEP, NEE, and ER in 2011, leading to neutral changes in GEP, NEE, and SR across the 2 years. The responses of ecosystem C exchange could have been due to the changes in soil ammonium nitrogen, community cover, and aboveground net primary productivity. Our findings of the transient and neutral changes in ecosystem C cycling under locust outbreaks highlight the importance of resistance, resilience, and stability of the temperate steppe in maintaining reliable ecosystem services, and facilitate the projections of ecosystem functioning in response to natural disturbance and climate change." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8b61933c81b809463bebbd8e94a9f202> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary We compared habitat use by rainbow trout sympatric (three streams) and allopatric (two streams) with brown trout to determine whether competition occurred between these two species in the southern Appalachian Mountains. We measured water depth, water velocity, substrate, distance to overhead vegetation, sunlight, and surface turbulence both where we collected trout and for the streams in general. This enabled us to separate the effects of habitat availability from possible competitive effects. The results provided strong evidence for asymmetrical interspecific competition. Habitat use varied significantly between allopatric and sympatric rainbow trout in 68% of the comparisons made. Portions of some differences refelected differences in habitats available in the several streams. However, for all habitat variables measured except sunlight, rainbow trout used their preferred habitats less in sympatry with brown trout than in allopatry if brown trout also preferred the same habitats. Multivariate analysis indicated that water velocity and its correlates (substrate particle size and surface turbulence) were the most critical habitat variables in the interaction between the species, cover in the form of shade and close overhead vegetation was second most important, and water depth was least important." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/1e4a69eb20ee10e712aa0dc6e24eae3e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Day-night changes in the vertical distribution, intensity, and size of bioluminescence flashes were investigated during a series of cruises to the northern Sargasso Sea in 1987 and 1988. Overall, depth integrated bioluminescence potential and flash density estimated from in situ measurements with a pumping bathyphotometer were 2 to 5 x higher at midnight than at midday. Depths from 50 to 100 m exhibited the most substantial day to night increases in bioluminescence potential and flash density. When classified by flash size (photon output per flash event), the increase from day to night was significant for all flash sizes, but was most dramatic for small flashes producing <7 x 108 photons flash-1. Bioluminescence potential and flash density increased 2 to 3 x during bathyphotometer measurements made at dusk. Bioluminescent light budgets estimated from day and night net collections in May and August 1987 also predicted 2.5 x higher nighttime than daytime mesoplankton bioluminescence. However, large bioluminescent taxa (mesoplankton) capable of significant vertical migrations only contributed on the order of 15% of the total bioluminescence in surface waters. Our results do not support the idea that most of the nightly increase in bioluminescence potential and flash density are due to vertical migration of bioluminescent organisms; rather they are consistent with an alternate view that photoinhibition of bioluminescent flashing by dinoflagellates may be primarily responsible for the diel patterns." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/02b28784c3d5a44ddc404d7a107d2627> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract. Comparative ecophysiological studies by measurements of photosystem II chlorophyll a fluorescence, porometry and stable isotope analyses were performed on regrowth of trees in a plantation of Eucalyptus saligna in Ethiopia. In the Shashemene-Munessa State Forest of the eastern escarpment of the Great Rift Valley, young plants of E. saligna and the native tree Podocarpus falcatus were compared under the canopy of an established E. saligna plantation, and the native tree Bersama abyssinica was also included. For further comparison fully sun-exposed plants of Eucalyptus globulus in a young newly established plantation, and trees of P. falcatus and the native pioneer tree Croton macrostachys in a remnant natural forest were examined. Photosynthetic yield measurements and light response curves suggested a gradation of sun-adapted to shade-adapted behaviour of E. globulus (exposed) >C. macrostachys >>E. saligna (understorey) ≥ P. falcatus ~ B. abyssinica. As indicated by carbon isotope discrimination, long-term water-use efficiency (WUE) tended to be higher in P. falcatus than in E. saligna in the understorey of the plantation. Transpiration measurements showed that Eucalyptus spp had the highest and P. falcatus the lowest instant leaf conductance for water vapour. Thus, P. falcatus competes well photosynthetically and by a more favourable WUE. These measurements support the expectation that the E. saligna plantation has a nurse effect for regrowth of native trees. With the management practice of regularly coppicing E. saligna in a 7-year rhythm a native P. falcatus forest may regenerate." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/75bce374631419be5f919fa80e4d612d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract This study analyzes the relationship between physical and chemical factors and the algal communities in tropical streams in micro-watersheds where >70% of their area has different land uses, specifically, cloud mountain forest, coffee plantations, and livestock pastures. Physical, chemical, and biological variables were measured monthly in each stream over a 1-year period. The concentrations of nitrates + nitrites, total suspended solids (TSS), and silica in the streams were found to differ during the dry and rainy seasons. Coffee-plantation streams showed the highest levels of suspended solids, nitrates + nitrites, and sulfates. Based on chlorophyll a concentration, the forest and coffee-plantation streams are oligo-mesotrophic, while pasture streams are meso-eutrophic. Forest streams displayed the lowest levels of richness and algal diversity, followed by coffee-plantation streams, whereas pasture streams were the most diverse. Chlorophyll a concentration and species richness depended on land use and season. Forest coverage was positively correlated with acidophilous and oligo-eutraphentic diatom species. Coffee coverage displayed a significant positive correlation with motile species and a significant negative correlation with pollution-sensitive diatom taxa. The results show that diatom assemblages responded to micro-watershed conditions and can be used to monitor the effects of land use on streams in tropical regions." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/bf36f956787b425c0d8bb7d9b0450fd0> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The foraging patterns of Osmia cornifrons (Radoszkowski) (Megachilidae, Hymenoptera) were determined with an immunomarking method and correlated with fruit set in a commercial tart cherry orchard in Pennsylvania. Adults of O. cornifrons were self-marked with chicken egg-white protein powder from a dispenser nest box placed at the center of the study orchard at early bloom. Flower samples were collected from randomly selected trees (n = 30) located at different distances from the nest box. Flowers were analyzed for the presence of immunomarker protein with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Foraging patterns were determined by measuring the distance and direction of marked flowers from the nest box. While marked flowers were found out to 55 m (maximum distance sampled), most marked flowers were found within 35 m from the nest and the percentage of marked flowers declined rapidly beyond that distance. Fruit density per limb cross-sectional area (cm2) in the study orchard was significantly higher than in the orchard without O. cornifrons, indicating the value of O. cornifrons as pollinators in increasing fruit yield in tart cherries." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/158fbc79fd7fac0cbd31c6c71a3c8ce8> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The results of ten-year observations on fluctuations in the sex of individual trees and the sex structure of tree stands in two insular pine forests in the south of Central Siberia are presented. It is noted that the ratio of sex types of pine trees has markedly changed since 1998–1999. Significant correlations between the sex structure of stands and anomalies of the annual average air temperature have been recorded since the early 1990s. The male generative sphere of pine has changed to the greatest extent. Periodicity and delay in the change of shoot sexualization in response to changes in temperature are discussed." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e3fc4068698991e8fdf87f4c5f7bed40> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Biofouling is an important factor that affects the bivalve farming industry. Fouling organisms may reduce growth and survival rate of the cultured species. Fouler are often filter feeders, so they are potential competitors for food resource with the cultured species. The present study was conducted to measure the impact of fouling on food uptake and nutrient release in April and June, 2006 in Daya Bay near Guangzhou, China. Results showed that fouling organisms had significant effect on food uptake and nutrient release. The chlorophyll a uptake rate of fouled scallops was 7.53Lh−1±1.416Lh−1 and 11.94Lh−1±2.497Lh−1 in April and June, respectively, significantly higher than those of cleaned scallops, i.e., 4.23Lh−1±2.744Lh−1 and 2.57Lh−1±1.832Lh−1 respectively. The consumption of total particulate matter by fouled scallops in April and June was 5.52Lh−1±0.818Lh−1 and 3.07Lh−1±0.971Lh−1, respectively; the corresponding results for cleaned scallops are 2.49Lh−1±0.614Lh−1 and 2.37±1.214Lh−1, respectively. Fouling increased ammonia release significantly. The ammonia release rate of fouled scallops was 33.81Lh−1±7.699Lh−1 and 76.39Lh−1±9.251Lh−1 in April and June, while cleaned scallops released 2.46Lh−1±0.511Lh−1 and 7.23Lh−1±1.026Lh−1 ammonia, respectively. Phosphate release of fouled scallops was 22.72Lh−1±9.978Lh−1 in June and cleaned scallops released phosphate 6.01Lh−1±0.876Lh−1 in April. Therefore, fouling contributed much to food reduction and concentration increase of ammonia and phosphate in water." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/1c4f99d02651898d0b2764344afac4fe> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Ecuadorian mountain rainforests are declining dramatically due to deforestation. Exploitation of remaining forests has led to low abundances of native, valuable timber species. Enrichment planting of selected native tree species into forest gaps is a strategy that may increase their abundance and maintain biodiversity. However, the development of successful planting strategies requires knowledge of environmental demands on, and ecological requirements of, native species during their establishment. This knowledge is currently lacking for mid- and late-successional species in Central American forests. Two deciduous, mid-successional (Cedrela montana, Tabebuia chrysantha) and two evergreen, late-successional native tree species (Nectandra membranacea, Podocarpus sprucei) were planted into felling gaps. Photosynthetic performance and growth in height of these species were assessed along light gradients during seedling establishment to test whether species-specific light responses were related to plant successional traits. Both mid-successional species benefited from higher light levels in gaps up to 30% canopy openness60°. In larger gaps, C. montana exhibited a significant decline in growth. As expected, growth of the late-successional species was only marginally increased at higher light levels. Nevertheless, the photosynthetic apparatus of N. membranacea displayed rapid acclimation to higher light conditions in gaps. Plant response to felling gaps may not always be predicted based on successional status. Our results suggest that the four investigated species may coexist in the same gap by occupying different niches along light gradients. This arrangement may offer an ecological basis to increase the abundance of valuable timber species through enrichment planting in Ecuador mountain rainforests." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/22f7d24613f669839b2b58bb67a223a0> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary We used a complete block design to experimentally study direct and indirect interactions in a three trophic-level freshwater system consisting of a top predator, the green sunfish, Lepomis cyanellus, an intermediate predator, small-mouthed salamander larvae, Ambystoma barbouri, and prey, hatchling isopods, Lirceus fontinalis. This system occurs naturally in small stream pools in central Kentucky; experiments were done in laboratory pools. Salamander larvae ate isopods and thus had a direct, negative effect on isopod survival. Accordingly, isopods responded to the presence of salamander larvae by increasing their tendency to bury themselves in the sand substrate. Fish ate salamanders and thus had a direct, negative effect on salamander survival. Salamanders responded to fish presence by increasing their time spent under plexiglass plates that simulate refuge rocks. The overall effect of fish on isopods depended on the presence of salamanders. In the absence of salamanders, fish predation on isopods had a direct, negative effect on isopod survival; isopods thus responded to the presence of fish by burying themselves in the sand. With salamanders present, fish had a positive overall effect on isopod survival; i.e., direct, negative effects of fish on isopods were outweighed by indirect, positive effects. Indirect positive effects of fish on isopods came through a reduction in salamander predation rates on isopods in the presence of fish. The mechanism involved both a decrease in the number of salamanders (a trophic-linkage indirect effect; cf. Miller and Kerfoot 1987) and a reduction in the feeding rate of individual salamanders on isopods (a behavioral indirect effect). The decrease in individual salamander feeding rates on isopods was due to reductions in both salamander activity and in spatial overlap between salamanders and isopods in the presence of fish. The latter effect reflected the fact that salamanders and isopods used different refuges from fish; salamanders went under refuge plates, whereas isopods primarily buried themselves in sand. Estimates of the relative importance of various direct and indirect effects of sunfish on isopods suggested that positive, behavioral indirect effects were of roughly the same magnitude as direct, negative effects, both of which were more important than were trophic-linkage indirect effects. Contrary to expectations, the presence of isopods did not affect the refuge use or survival of salamanders in the presence of fish." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2b2c8e33f73b0183488428a2018b7a22> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The existence of begging costs has recently been the focus of evolutionary studies on parent–offspring conflict. Indirect findings seem to support the existence of a nest predation cost of begging. However, empirical direct evidence of nestling begging attracting the attention of nest predators has been criticized because of methodological problems, mainly the use of artificial nests and playbacks. In order to avoid this problem, we used natural and active nests and real chicks. We utilized Common Blackbird (Turdus merula) nests to experimentally create high and control begging nests by introducing a Great Spotted Cuckoo (Clamator glandarius) or Blackbird chick respectively. We also explored the effect of brood size comparing between Blackbird broods augmented and reduced by one chick. Experimentally parasitized nests were significantly more predated than simply augmented or reduced broods: nest predation for Cuckoo introduced (high begging) nests was more than double that predation for nests of the other two groups. However, we did not find any effect of the brood size. The presence of a Great Spotted Cuckoo chick in a nest also favors an earlier detection of the nest by predators. Parental activity at the nests seems not to be a factor explaining these results as we did not detect significant differences between Cuckoo and Blackbird introduced nests in visit rates. Therefore, our findings support the hypothesis that nestling begging has a severe cost in terms of predation and, hence, this cost may impose an important restriction to the evolution of begging behavior." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/835d8d95c38cb288885623c8d71dc182> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract I examined population traits of eight isolated populations of a tropical forest rodent (Proechimys semispinosus, the Central American spiny rat) for 1 year in central Panamá. Populations were sampled by monthly live-trapping, and seven traits (density, population growth rate, adult survival, reproductive effort, age structure, sex ratio, and body mass) were compared among populations. I also compared results with published data from nearby mainland populations. Each isolated population showed characteristics typical of island populations when compared with mainland populations, including higher and more stable densities, reduced reproductive effort, and greater body mass. Densities were the highest yet recorded for this species, and biomass of these island populations was among the highest of any tropical rodent yet studied. Population traits varied not only between island and mainland populations but also among island populations. P. semispinosus have traits that allow individuals in a population to rapidly respond to temporal changes in habitat quality or resource abundance. These traits include a high reproductive rate and an ability to adjust reproductive effort to changes in density. P. semispinosus are therefore able to quickly reach and maintain high densities under favorable conditions, thereby allowing close tracking of temporally and spatially varying resources. This flexibility is predicted for habitat generalists and presumably promotes abundance and persistence in temporally and spatially heterogeneous environments. P. semispinosus, often the most abundant and widely distributed species of rodent in forests throughout their geographic range, therefore have traits that are similar to those of generalist rodents in temperate forests." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d5f2b6c73057f8fdc5154bac7fdfda56> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Crowding effect in natural populations of three species ofSargassum, subtidal marine macrophytic algae, was investigated by harvesting all plants within a 1×1 m or 0.5×0.5m quadrat located at depths of 3–5m in Tanabe Bay (33°41′N and 135°20′E).Sargassum populations conformed to the same 3/2 power law that holds in many terrestrial plant populations." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f7c47f8da162e82b80f8a0d894628eca> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Biological responses to climate change are typically communicated in generalized terms such as poleward and altitudinal range shifts, but adaptation efforts relevant to management decisions often require forecasts that incorporate the interaction of multiple climatic and nonclimatic stressors at far smaller spatiotemporal scales. We argue that the desire for generalizations has, ironically, contributed to the frequent conflation of weather with climate, even within the scientific community. As a result, current predictions of ecological responses to climate change, and the design of experiments to understand underlying mechanisms, are too often based on broad-scale trends and averages that at a proximate level may have very little to do with the vulnerability of organisms and ecosystems. The creation of biologically relevant metrics of environmental change that incorporate the physical mechanisms by which climate trains patterns of weather, coupled with knowledge of how organisms and ecosystems respond to these changes, can offer insight into which aspects of climate change may be most important to monitor and predict. This approach also has the potential to enhance our ability to communicate impacts of climate change to nonscientists and especially to stakeholders attempting to enact climate change adaptation policies." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/cfdd786fb46fc6c2d1d4fc09fd92fe98> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The coagulation profiles of 36 mountain gazelles (Gazella gazella) aged 2–6 years, and 17 Nubian ibexes (Capra ibex nubiana), aged 1–4 years, were evaluated and compared. The following parameters were determined in both species: prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), fibrinogen concentration (FIB), and clotting factors VII, VIII:C, IX, X, and XI. Thrombin clotting time (TCT) was also determined in mountain gazelles. The results indicated significant interspecies differences in most parameters, with lower PT, aPTT, and factors VII, IX, and XI and higher factor XIII:C activities in the Nubian ibex than the mountain gazelle. Gender seemed to have a limited influence on these parameters within each species. Both species had higher plasma FIB and factor VIII:C activity relative to humans. This study is the first record of coagulation variables in these two species of wild Arabian desert ruminants." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/42fcb7a0939dd774a5a77b1dcfc9e37d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The possible effects of soil microbial community structure on organic matter decomposition rates have been widely acknowledged, but are poorly understood. Understanding these relationships is complicated by the fact that microbial community structure and function are likely to both affect and be affected by organic matter quality and chemistry, thus it is difficult to draw mechanistic conclusions from field studies. We conducted a reciprocal soil inoculum × litter transplant laboratory incubation experiment using samples collected from a set of sites that have similar climate and plant species composition but vary significantly in bacterial community structure and litter quality. The results showed that litter quality explained the majority of variation in decomposition rates under controlled laboratory conditions: over the course of the 162-day incubation, litter quality explained nearly two-thirds (64 %) of variation in decomposition rates, and a smaller proportion (25 %) was explained by variation in the inoculum type. In addition, the relative importance of inoculum type on soil respiration increased over the course of the experiment, and was significantly higher in microcosms with lower litter quality relative to those with higher quality litter. We also used molecular phylogenetics to examine the relationships between bacterial community composition and soil respiration in samples through time. Pyrosequencing revealed that bacterial community composition explained 32 % of the variation in respiration rates. However, equal portions (i.e., 16 %) of the variation in bacterial community composition were explained by inoculum type and litter quality, reflecting the importance of both the meta-community and the environment in bacterial assembly. Taken together, these results indicate that the effects of changing microbial community composition on decomposition are likely to be smaller than the potential effects of climate change and/or litter quality changes in response to increasing atmospheric CO2 concentrations or atmospheric nutrient deposition." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/5de0f7153416ebe7632c8e6e55b65fd8> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Morphological and geochemical comparisons between modern cryptic microbialites from Lizard Island/Great Barrier Reef and fossil counterparts in the Upper Jurassic (Southern Germany, Dobrogea/Romania) and late Lower Cretaceous (Aptian/Albian from Cantabria/Spain) spongiolitic environments show that there are common factors controlling the crust formations mostly independent of light despite of diverging (paleo-) oceanographic positions as well as relationships of competitors. Factors such as increased alkalinity, oligotrophy, and reduced allochthonous deposition are of major importance. Thrombolitic microbialites are interpreted as biologically induced and therefore calcified in isotopic equilibrium with the surrounding sea water. Corresponding with shallowing upward cycles, microbial mats which produce stromatolitic peloidal crusts become more important. Different biomarkers are introduced for the first time extracted and analyzed from spongiolitic limestones of Lower Kimmeridgian age from Southern Germany." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/bfa7500c5688aefffc70a1783256bf17> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract BackgroundGeolocators are useful for tracking movements of long-distance migrants, but potential negative effects on birds have not been well studied. We tested for effects of geolocators (0.8–2.0 g total, representing 0.1–3.9 % of mean body mass) on 16 species of migratory shorebirds, including five species with 2–4 subspecies each for a total of 23 study taxa. Study species spanned a range of body sizes (26–1091 g) and eight genera, and were tagged at 23 breeding and eight nonbreeding sites. We compared breeding performance and return rates of birds with geolocators to control groups while controlling for potential confounding variables. ResultsWe detected negative effects of tags for three small-bodied species. Geolocators reduced annual return rates for two of 23 taxa: by 63 % for semipalmated sandpipers and by 43 % for the arcticola subspecies of dunlin. High resighting effort for geolocator birds could have masked additional negative effects. Geolocators were more likely to negatively affect return rates if the total mass of geolocators and color markers was 2.5–5.8 % of body mass than if tags were 0.3–2.3 % of body mass. Carrying a geolocator reduced nest success by 42 % for semipalmated sandpipers and tripled the probability of partial clutch failure in semipalmated and western sandpipers. Geolocators mounted perpendicular to the leg on a flag had stronger negative effects on nest success than geolocators mounted parallel to the leg on a band. However, parallel-band geolocators were more likely to reduce return rates and cause injuries to the leg. No effects of geolocators were found on breeding movements or changes in body mass. Among-site variation in geolocator effect size was high, suggesting that local factors were important. ConclusionsNegative effects of geolocators occurred only for three of the smallest species in our dataset, but were substantial when present. Future studies could mitigate impacts of tags by reducing protruding parts and minimizing use of additional markers. Investigators could maximize recovery of tags by strategically deploying geolocators on males, previously marked individuals, and successful breeders, though targeting subsets of a population could bias the resulting migratory movement data in some species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8c0a380f2ead4374b02342ef5a7753f9> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The acarine fauna of two abundant species of cushion plant on the high, short-grass prairie of S.E. Wyoming were used to test The MacArthur-Wilson Theory of Island Biogeography. Multiple regression analysis using area, distance and percent moisture as independent variables and number of mite species and number of mite individuals were run for the two sampling dates. Results showed area alone to be consistently and highly correlated (r=0.84–0.94) with both species and individuals for one cushion species. The slopes of the species-area and individuals-area curves are among the highest recorded and were significantly higher on the second sampling date. Selective seasonal changes in the fauna were shown by increases both in numbers of species and individuals, mainly on larger cushions, for the later sampling period. It is hypothesized that seasonal changes are due to an increase in the number of predator species in response to an increase in the number of prey items. The slopes of the species-area curves are compared with those in the literature and it is argued that slope values are more dependent upon the taxonomic group being studied than on whether the island is insular or oceanic. Finally, we suggest that The MacArthur-Wilson Theory is not applicable to islands which 1) exhibit continuous growth, 2) lack a discrete species source, and 3) are relatively transitory." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a48df7bf854ffcf52ce48622899c2a87> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract We give the first mathematically rigorous proof that disturbances allow competing species to coexist. This work provides a mathematical framework to explain the existence of fugitive species and the role played by disturbances in increasing or decreasing the biodiversity of ecosystems. We study modifications of the metapopulation model for patchy environments proposed by Caswell and Cohen (1990, 1991). For the one- and two-species models we give necessary and sufficient conditions on the parameters for the existence of a non-trivial equilibrium solution, which is shown to be always globally stable." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/aef081307abb8d9d134210fd9ebfab51> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Cannibalism by larval damselflies late in larval development on larvae a few instars smaller has been widely documented. I examine here the survival of eggs oviposited near the end of the flight season of adult Enallagma boreale in the presence and absence of potential cannibals, individuals that hatched from eggs earlier in the season, over an extended part of the life-cycle. The role of competition as a modifier of cannibalism was examined by manipulating egg density, environmental productivity, and habitat complexity. Survival in the absence of potential cannibals ranged from 5% to nearly 50% but was only 0–3% in the presence of cannibals. Survival of small larvae was related to manipulations of habitat complexity but not initial density or resources. There were no significant interactions of the presence of large larvae with other experimental treatments on the survival of small larvae. The mean size of small larvae was greater in the presence of cannibals. This may be because the cannibalism treatment reduced the density of small larvae and reduced competition for resources, or that the cannibals preferentially fed on small larvae and only relatively large individuals remained. Fertilization of the habitat or manipulating the initial density of small larvae did not affect mass of small larvae at the end of the experiment, which would be expected if small larvae were affected by competition for resources. Potential cannibals, however, emerged at higher mass when small larvae were present at low density and when productivity of the habitat was increased. This suggests that the negative effect of competition by small larvae outweighs the positive effect of being potential prey for large larvae." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d5f977f6a5c60f9836ad546ad1107e73> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Populations of the same species vary in their secondary metabolite content. This variation has been attributed to biotic and abiotic environmental conditions as well as to historical factors. Some studies have focused on the geographic variation of chemical diversity in plant populations, but whether this structure conforms to a central–marginal model or a mosaic pattern remains unclear. Furthermore, assessing the chemical diversity of invasive plants in their native distribution facilitates the understanding of their relationships with natural enemies. We examined the geographic variation of chemical diversity in Mexican populations of the bittervine weed Mikania micrantha and its relationship to herbivore damage. The foliar volatile terpenoid blend was analyzed in 165 individuals of 14 populations in the Pacific and Gulf of Mexico tropical watersheds. A cluster analysis grouped individuals with similar terpenoid blends into 56 compositional types. Chemical diversity was measured using the number of compounds and their concentration within the blends for individuals, and the number and frequency of compositional types for populations. A stepwise multiple regression analysis performed with geographic, climatic, and chemical diversity variables explained herbivore damage. However, population-level chemical diversity was the only variable found to be significant (β = −0.79, P = 0.042) in the model (R 2 = 0.89). A Mantel test using Euclidean distances did not indicate any separation by geographic origin; however, four barriers were identified using Monmonier’s algorithm. We conclude that variation in population-level chemical diversity follows a mosaic pattern in which geographic factors (i.e., natural barriers) have some effect and that variation is also associated with the local intensity of herbivore attack." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b2cc8779224c3e948eb1e628d4dbe990> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract In most pollination systems, animals transfer pollen among plants of a given species. Pollinator visitations do not come without cost, so plants usually offer a reward. However, the flowers of some plant species, mostly orchids, lack rewards and deceive animals into visiting their flowers. Deceptive species are thought to have high levels of variation in traits associated with advertisement and pollinator attraction, which have been attributed to genetic drift, or disruptive selection due to pollinator behavior. Rewarding species are assumed to have less variation due to stabilizing selection. We compared variability in floral morphology and fragrance composition between deceptive and rewarding species. Because both suites of traits are often linked with floral advertisement and pollinator attraction, we expected variation to be greater in species with deceptive pollination systems than in those offering rewards. We obtained floral morphology metrics for 20 deceptive species and 41 rewarding species native or naturalized in Puerto Rico, Venezuela, and Ecuador. Floral fragrances were sampled from eight deceptive species and four rewarding species. We found that the amplitude of variation in floral morphology and fragrance composition covaries significantly. Comparison of coefficients of variation for morphology indicated that, overall, deceptive species show significantly higher variation than rewarding species, and this pattern was also found among just orchids or just nonorchids. There were no statistical differences in morphological variation between orchids and nonorchids within a functional pollination group. Fragrance variation, measured by Jaccard distance, tended to be greater for deceptive species than for rewarding species. Although overlap in measures of variation occurs between the two groups, the data support the hypothesis that populations of deception-pollinated species are more variable than rewarding species in traits associated with pollinator attraction." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/054b85ae9c472df669a1e8e3712c33df> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Lianas are an important component of tropical forests, contributing up to 25 % of the woody stems and 35 % of woody species diversity. Lianas invest less in structural support but more in leaves compared to trees of similar biomass. These physiological and morphological differences suggest that lianas may interact with neighboring plants in ways that are different from similarly sized trees. However, the vast majority of past liana competition studies have failed to identify the unique competitive effects of lianas by controlling for the amount of biomass removed. We assessed liana competition in the forest understory over the course of 3 years by removing liana biomass and an equal amount of tree biomass in 40 plots at 10 sites in a secondary tropical moist forest in central Panama. We found that growth of understory trees and lianas, as well as planted seedlings, was limited due to competitive effects from both lianas and trees, though the competitive impacts varied by species, season, and size of neighbors. The removal of trees resulted in greater survival of planted seedlings compared to the removal of lianas, apparently related to a greater release from competition for light. In contrast, lianas had a species-specific negative effect on drought-tolerant Dipteryx oleifera seedlings during the dry season, potentially due to competition for water. We conclude that, at local scales, lianas and trees have unique and differential effects on understory dynamics, with lianas potentially competing more strongly during the dry season, and trees competing more strongly for light." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/480bff113f681ddfa4a2ec89bb5be8fb> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Studies have been carried out on the Mg2+ Ca2+-myofibrillar ATPase from the muscles of fish adapted to different environmental temperatures. The thermal stability of the ATPase is strongly correlated with mean habitat temperature. Activities of Antarctic fish ATPases are significantly higher at low temperatures than those of temperate and tropical water species. The effects of ionic strength on ATPase activity have also been studied. The Gibbs free energy of activation (ΔG #) was found to increase and enzyme activity decrease with increasing ionic strength within the physiological temperature range of each species. Significantly lower values of ΔG #, of around 1 Kcal/mole, are obtained for the ATPase of cold-adapted compared to tropical fish. Enthalpic and entropic activation energies were also reduced in the cold adapted ATPases. It is postulated that the reduction of the enthalpic activation term in the cold adapted enzyme confers the advantage of reducing the temperature sensitivity of the rate limiting step thus partly compensating for the low heat content of the cellular environment. Possible molecular mechanisms of temperature compensation in fish myofibrillar ATPase are discussed." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/fe9c564a4a5ac2808b6748b5f05667c7> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Migration patterns and habitat use of sub-yearling Chinook salmon during initial ocean entrance is poorly understood. Twenty-five years ago, sub-yearling Chinook salmon were hypothesized to stay close to shore (<5 km). To test this hypothesis we sampled the surf-zone of a southern Oregon dissipative sandy beach throughout the summer of 2006 (06/07–09/29) using a beach seine in 1 m of water depth. We caught 48 sub-yearlings over six dates (07/22 to 09/01). Mean standard length of Chinook salmon caught in the surf-zone increased from 9.1 ± 0.6 (07/22/06) to 11.6 ± 0.7 cm (09/01/06), suggesting a mean increase of 0.6 mm in standard length (S.L.) per day. Early in the summer, smaller fish fed mostly on amphipods. Later in the summer, larger juveniles fed primarily on larval and juvenile fish. All prey items were common in the surf-zone. Juveniles appear to migrate from the estuary to the surf-zone where they feed on the local zooplankton for up to two summer months before migrating offshore." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/1aff38c767fa51573d7824ca4caa553b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract There are 3 genera and at least 19 species names of fossils, attributed to calcareous algae, sponges, hydrozoans, corals, ammonites, gastropods, foraminifers, and radiolarians that have been dedicated to Erik Flügel. These are listed with their original diagnosis or description and re-illustrations of the holotypes." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/84cdd69d441cda3f79753871949a71a0> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary 1.The ant fauna of 3 islands of the Central Seychelles was studied by means of pitfall traps. The number of species and their abundances were investigated in relation to differences in island size, habitats, and microclimate conditions. In addition the effects of these factors on niche breadth and niche overlap were studied.2.Nineteen and species were collected that belonged to 14 genera in 4 subfamilies (Table 2). Different numbers of species were found on different islands (Table 1). There are no significant correlations between the numbers of species, sizes of islands, and the available resources. The distribution of congeneric species agrees with the expected increase in ‘relative diversity’ on smaller islands (Fig. 3).3.Species diversity and species distribution depend to some extent on habitat differences. This was evaluated by phytosociologic methods and microclimatic measurements. The composition of the ant fauna on different islands is more constant in undisturbed, autochthonous habitats than in those habitats that are strongly influenced by man.4.Specific niche breadth and relative abundance of ant species showed a significantly positive correlation. Within comparable habitats, average niche breadth and niche overlap are greatest on the smallest island. Because the relative density also increases on this island, one cannot speak of a lower ecologic saturation compared with the larger islands." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9ecc72404dafa2f95fedeed23cbe2129> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract BackgroundComprehensive explanations of behavioral adaptations rarely invoke all levels famously admonished by Niko Tinbergen. The role of developmental processes and plasticity, in particular, has often been neglected. In this paper, we combine ecological, physiological and developmental perspectives in developing a hypothesis to account for the evolution of ‘the lemur syndrome’, a combination of reduced sexual dimorphism, even adult sex ratios, female dominance and mild genital masculinization characterizing group-living species in two families of Malagasy primates. ResultsWe review the different components of the lemur syndrome and compare it with similar adaptations reported for other mammals. We find support for the assertion that the lemur syndrome represents a unique set of integrated behavioral, demographic and morphological traits. We combine existing hypotheses about underlying adaptive function and proximate causation by adding a potential developmental mechanism linking maternal stress and filial masculinization, and outline an evolutionary scenario for its canalization. ConclusionsWe propose a new hypothesis linking ecological, physiological, developmental and evolutionary processes to adumbrate a comprehensive explanation for the evolution of the lemur syndrome, whose assumptions and predictions can guide diverse future research on lemurs. This hypothesis should also encourage students of other behavioral phenomena to consider the potential role of developmental plasticity in evolutionary innovation." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/7f32577cfaf6b8d11120c9c9fe32f55e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract With the prospect of large-scale environmental changes, there is an urgent need to obtain information regarding environmental influences acting on the emergence of cercariae in marine systems. We investigated the response of trematodes of the intertidal snail Zeacumantus subcarinatus to altered temperature, salinity, and water level. The emergence of one trematode species, Maritrema novaezealandensis (Microphallidae), showed a weak trend to decrease with increased temperature; whereas, the emergence of a second species, Philophthalmus sp. (Philophthalmidae), increased at warmer temperatures. Both species exhibited increased cercarial emergence at the lowest salinity used (30 PSU). More M. novaezealandensis cercariae emerged when snails were kept partially submerged. In contrast, emergence of Philophthalmus sp. increased when snails were completely submerged. These results may reflect different transmission strategies employed by the two trematode species. Based on this model, we propose that trematode parasitism in intertidal zones is likely to be impacted by various changes in the marine environment resulting from global warming." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/c54729291d4a7147a4d29b3c997ceca6> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The pore-systems of 17 extant species of Loxoconcha around Japan were studied in order to understand their phylogeny and evolution. The phylogeny was estimated by two steps. First, the 17 species were divided into two groups, Group A (12 species) and Group B (five species) by Pore pattern Below Eye tubercle (PBE) analysis. Then, intragroup relationships were estimated by Differentiation of Distributional pattern of Pore-system (DDP) analysis. PBE analysis reveals that species of Groups A and B have on average different ecological preferences. Species of Group A, which appeared in the late Pliocene, are more diverse, have both phytal and bottom-dwelling modes of life, possess fewer pore-systems in the ventral area, and inhabit normal marine environments. Species of Group B, whose oldest fossil record is the lower Miocene, are less diverse, have only bottom-dwelling species, possess more pore-systems in the ventral area, and tend to inhabit brackish water environments. The results of this study suggest that the differences in ecology may have had an impact on the late Cenozoic diversification around Japan. The primary invasion of Group B occurred before the lower Miocene,with no subsequent diversification. Group A invaded after the late Pliocene and immediately diversified, which created the present abundance of Loxoconcha species around Japan in both species diversity and variety of modes of life." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e35f7abfd448b82e14faee401818b6aa> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Four gobiid species, Babka gymnotrachelus, Neogobius melanostomus, Neogobius fluviatilis, and Proterorhinus semilunaris, were parasitologically studied in different localities of the Dnieper and Vistula river basins. The highest number of parasitic species was found in N. fluviatilis (35 taxa). The parasite fauna of N. melanostomus, B. gymnotrachelus, and P. semilunaris consists of 23, 22, and 15 taxa, respectively. The species accumulation curves show stable accumulation of parasite species by all four fish hosts along the studied part of the corridor, from the Dnieper Estuary to the Vistula River delta. The plot reveals also that the studied gobies lose the parasites common in the host native range and accept new parasites from the colonized area. In the case of N. melanostomus, it complies with the enemy release hypothesis, as the parasite load was low in the invaded area if compared to the native range. The three other alien gobies are vector for Gyrodactylus proterorhini in the Baltic basin. Moreover, populations of this alien monogenean tend to be more abundant in their new range in comparison with the Black Sea basin. In general, the number of parasite species in the colonized area was of the same rank as in the native one for N. fluviatilis, and even higher for B. gymnotrachelus. This results from accumulating new parasite species along the gobiid invasion route. In particular, the N. fluviatilis, B. gymnotrachelus, and P. semilunaris lost some of their native parasites and gained the local ones after entering the post-dam part of the Vistula River; it can be interpreted as a partial escape from parasites." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/6a5a7738da38efe9c20cafd7a63cc97f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Establishing trees in pastures can have production and conservation benefits, but is complicated by the presence of livestock. The need to protect seedlings from livestock increases tree establishment costs, which in turn, can deter landowners from planting trees. Living fences are a ubiquitous feature of pasture landscapes in the tropics that could help protect newly planted trees by preventing livestock trampling and browsing. This study quantified the effectiveness of a living fence in protecting tree seedlings during the first 2 years after planting. The four native tree species evaluated were: Cedrela odorata L., Pachira quinata (Jacq.) W.S. Alverson, Samanea saman (Jacq.) Merr., and Tabebuia rosea (Bertol.) A. DC. Results show that the living fence provided protection from livestock except in cases where tree species were highly palatable as forage (i.e. P. quinata). Trees planted into the living fence generally had greater survival (62 vs. 28%), relative growth (10.3 times initial height vs. 5.8 times initial height), and final height (191 cm vs. 108 cm) compared to those planted in open pasture after 2 years. However, survival and growth of trees planted into the fence remained lower than that observed at a nearby plantation with no livestock, regular weeding and no living fences. This study indicates that use of living fences as a protective barrier could be an effective low-cost approach for establishing trees in tropical pasture landscapes." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/5beab313674be6ade994dde0faf14ac6> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Recent work suggests that soil nutrient heterogeneity may modulate plant responses to drivers of global change, but interactions between N heterogeneity and changes in rainfall regime remain poorly understood. We used a model grassland system to investigate the interactive effects of N application pattern (homogeneous, heterogeneous) and precipitation-magnitude manipulation during the growing season (control, +50 % rainfall, −50 % rainfall) on aboveground biomass and plant community dominance patterns. Our study resulted in four major findings: patchy N addition increased within-plot variability in plant size structure at the species level, but did not alter total aboveground biomass; patchy N addition increased community dominance and caused a shift in the ranking of subordinate plant species; unlike community-level biomass, plant species differed in their biomass response to the rainfall treatments; and neither aboveground biomass nor community dominance showed significant interactions between N pattern and rainfall manipulation, suggesting that grassland responses to patchy N inputs are insensitive to water addition or rainfall reduction in our temperate study system. Overall, our results indicate that the spatial pattern of N inputs has greater effects on species biomass variability and community dominance than on aboveground production. These short-term changes in plant community structure may have significant implications for longer-term patterns of vegetation dynamics and plant-soil feedbacks. Moreover our results suggest that the magnitude of precipitation during the growing season plays a limited role in grassland responses to heterogeneous organic N inputs, emphasizing the need to consider other components of precipitation change in future heterogeneity studies." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ccd91f4c39c8d1223ab3142394baaf96> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Willow buds and twigs compose the main part of the willow ptarmigan’s (Lagopus lagopus) diet during winter. This study evaluated how position of willow ramets in relation to snow level affects the browsing of willow ptarmigan in NW Finland. Ramet position in relation to snow level affected the browsing intensity of willow ptarmigan: 5% of shoots were cut and more than 8% of buds were eaten by willow ptarmigan when ramet was staked at the maximum snow level, whereas ramets bent down were unbrowsed and browsing of ramets staked upright was negligible. Browsing significantly decreased the number of vegetative buds and catkins. The results show that snow level and ramet characteristics are important determinants of willow ptarmigan foraging." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/01c45bd04502aed061729efa73e4a9bf> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Rising atmospheric CO2 concentration may change the isotopic signature of plant N by altering plant and microbial processes involved in the N cycle. CO2 may increase leaf δ15N by increasing plant community productivity, C input to soil, and, ultimately, microbial mineralization of old, 15N-enriched organic matter. We predicted that CO2 would increase aboveground productivity (ANPP; g biomass m−2) and foliar δ15N values of two grassland communities in Texas, USA: (1) a pasture dominated by a C4 exotic grass, and (2) assemblages of tallgrass prairie species, the latter grown on clay, sandy loam, and silty clay soils. Grasslands were exposed in separate experiments to a pre-industrial to elevated CO2 gradient for 4 years. CO2 stimulated ANPP of pasture and of prairie assemblages on each of the three soils, but increased leaf δ15N only for prairie plants on a silty clay. δ15N increased linearly as mineral-associated soil C declined on the silty clay. Mineral-associated C declined as ANPP increased. Structural equation modeling indicted that CO2 increased ANPP partly by favoring a tallgrass (Sorghastrum nutans) over a mid-grass species (Bouteloua curtipendula). CO2 may have increased foliar δ15N on the silty clay by reducing fractionation during N uptake and assimilation. However, we interpret the soil-specific, δ15N–CO2 response as resulting from increased ANPP that stimulated mineralization from recalcitrant organic matter. By contrast, CO2 favored a forb species (Solanum dimidiatum) with higher δ15N than the dominant grass (Bothriochloa ischaemum) in pasture. CO2 enrichment changed grassland δ15N by shifting species relative abundances." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9752eea05cb376629c764cbd9e09f6a2> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract We studied the effects of slightly elevated temperature (T), O3 concentration (O3) and their combination (T + O3) on the antioxidant defense, gas exchange and total leaf area of Betula pendula saplings in field conditions. During the second year of the experiment, T enhanced the total leaf area, net photosynthesis (P n) and maximum capacity of carboxylation, redox state of ascorbate and total antioxidant capacity in the apoplast. O3 did not affect the total leaf area, but P n was slightly and g s significantly reduced. The saplings responded to elevated O3 level by closing the stomata and by developing leaves with a lower leaf area per mass, rather than by accumulating ascorbate in the apoplast. The effects of T and O3 on total leaf area and P n were counteractive. Elevated O3 reduced the saplings’ ability to utilize the warmer growth environment by increasing the stomatal limitation for photosynthesis and by reducing the redox state of ascorbate in the apoplast in the combination treatment as compared to T alone." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/90ea988ab5d25dc47323513ee3b3e56c> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary A colorimetric method for the estimation of tannins in green leaf and black tea is described. The absorbance corresponding to tannins and other oxidizable substances is read at 760 nm, the Folin-Denis reagent being used. The absorbance corresponding to non-tannins is read after precipitation of the tannins with gelatine. The tannin content of the tea is calculated by difference." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/71d7e2cbaa1d1c7c2a35956ad77f8505> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Ecosystems provide multiple services upon which humans depend. Understanding the drivers of the ecosystem functions that support these services is therefore important. Much research has investigated how species richness influences functioning, but we lack knowledge of how other community attributes affect ecosystem functioning. Species evenness, species spatial arrangement, and the identity of dominant species are three attributes that could affect ecosystem functioning, by altering the relative abundance of functional traits and the probability of synergistic species interactions such as facilitation and complementary resource use. We tested the effect of these three community attributes and their interactions on ecosystem functions over a growing season, using model grassland communities consisting of three plant species from three functional groups: a grass (Anthoxanthum odoratum), a forb (Plantago lanceolata), and a N-fixing forb (Lotus corniculatus). We measured multiple ecosystem functions that support ecosystem services, including ecosystem gas exchange, water retention, C and N loss in leachates, and plant biomass production. Species evenness and dominant species identity strongly influenced the ecosystem functions measured, but spatial arrangement had few effects. By the end of the growing season, evenness consistently enhanced ecosystem functioning and this effect occurred regardless of dominant species identity. The identity of the dominant species under which the highest level of functioning was attained varied across the growing season. Spatial arrangement had the weakest effect on functioning, but interacted with dominant species identity to affect some functions. Our results highlight the importance of understanding the role of multiple community attributes in driving ecosystem functioning." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/6584f02a933de9132b400dfe84ad4831> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Keystone species are crucial in restoration ecology. Among all the keystone species known so far, live oysters are by far, the most efficient ‘keystone niches’, attracting hundreds of species to them. A new classification of keystone species is presented, including oysters as the best keystone niches." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/6340b407b691f5bc1425195bc2ecaa4c> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Typhoons are a common feature of summer and autumn months in the East China Sea. These events often promote phytoplankton growth in surface waters as a result of upwelling and transport of nutrients, but their effects on sub-surface waters and ecosystems are little known. Furthermore, biological studies tend to focus on phytoplankton (using chlorophyll a assays), rather than on heterotrophic zooplankton. Indeed, using standard shipboard sampling techniques, measurements of biological and physicochemical changes induced by the storms are difficult to perform and risky. Using a camera mounted on an underwater, cabled observatory system in shallow coastal waters of Okinawa, Japan, we collected the first continuous, in situ observations of the near-bottom mesoplankton community during a series of typhoons. An increase in diatoms and radiolarians was found during all typhoons, whereas the response of larger zooplankton groups was variable between typhoons. A bloom of Trichodesmium cyanobacteria and diatoms was seen after a series of typhoons, while the total chlorophyll a concentration remained nearly unchanged at the sampling location. These findings shed new light on short-term responses of sub-surface ecosystems during typhoons." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/53ba824ef1453b5b40b153352852314b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Zooplankton abundance and community structures were studied in three west Spitsbergen fjords at the beginning of the warm phase, which seem to have entered in 2006. Sampling was conducted in summer 2007 at stations distributed along transects in Hornsund, Isfjorden and Kongsfjorden. Variations in zooplankton standing stocks and community structures (assessing taxonomic diversity and zoogeographical affiliations) were analysed in relation to the environmental variables using multivariate techniques. The hydrographic conditions in Hornsund were influenced by the cold Arctic Water, whereas those in Isfjorden and especially in Kongsfjorden were, to a greater extent, under the influence of the warm Atlantic Water. High abundances of both meroplankton and holoplankton organisms were observed in Kongsfjorden, with high contributions of boreal and ubiquitous species (Calanus finmarchicus and Oithona similis, respectively). In Hornsund at the same time, the zooplankton consisted mainly of boreo-Arctic and Arctic species, the abundances of which were comparable along the West Spitsbergen Shelf. Our results indicate that the difference in hydrography had measurable effects on the zooplankton community in the study area. Furthermore, by comparing regions of contrasting oceanographic conditions, we present evidence as to how the zooplankton structure will change in the Arctic ecosystems if the warming trends continue to operate with the same dynamics. The advection of Atlantic waters to the Arctic seas may lead to changes in zooplankton structure, with increased abundance and contributions of boreal and small ubiquitous species. The ‘warmer Arctic fjords’ scenarios may also induce more rapid development of both holoplankton and meroplankton populations and, consequently, modify the trophic interactions in plankton communities." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d47d496d176af1545ca26099ae90f5db> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Recent evidence suggests that morphological divergence of the American crocodile (Crocodylus acutus) occurred in Greater Antilles under conditions of prolonged isolation and hybridization with the Cuban crocodile (C. rhombifer). We investigated morphological diversity in C. acutus in the coastal zone of the Yucatán Peninsula, where isolation and hybridization have also been reported. We compared the relationships among various morphological traits between insular and coastal populations. Our results suggest morphological diversity in the region, which is possibly related to population isolation and mechanical constraints imposed by differences in diet. A broad-snouted morphotype appears typical of island populations. Hybridization could also cause morphological variation, but its importance in this case remains to be confirmed. Sexual dimorphism of the American crocodile in the region appears to be less pronounced than for other crocodilians. We also provide population-specific size estimation models for two populations (Banco Chinchorro and Cozumel) to improve future monitoring." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/1f19f90b1862c7edad59896da895008f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Prey ingested byMnemiopsis mccradyi collected in Link Port (Indian River, east coast of central Florida) consisted mostly of copepod nauplii, barnacle nauplii, bivalve veligers, and adult copepods (Acartia sp.,Oithona sp.); abundances in that order. Compared to relative in situ densities, there was an increased consumption of barnacle nauplii, bivalve veligers, andAcartia sp., and a decreasesed consumption of copepod nauplii andOithona sp., implying that prey selection had occurred. In situ clearance rates (based on numbers of ingested prey, digestion rates, and in situ prey densities) forM. mccradyi (5 cm mean length) were 0.1 to 1.31 h−1 individual−1, depending on prey taxon. These rates are less than those measured previously in the laboratory; however, it is not possible to state if this difference is statistically significant." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/07217a7484a5b04982e5f3819a211e7a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The nostrils of the seabird Calonectris diomedea are endowed with a salt-excreting gland that could produce a suitable environment for the colonization of extreme halophilic prokaryotes. We have studied in this organ the presence of extreme halophiles by means of culturing techniques. We could easily cultivate members of haloarchaea, and all cultures studied were identified as members of one of the two species Halococcus morrhuae and Hcc. dombrowskii. In order to reveal the diversity of these colonizers, we undertook a taxonomic study. Altogether, the results indicated that members of the genus Halococcus may constitute a part of the natural epizootic microbiota of C. diomedea, and that they exhibit such an important degree of taxonomic variability that appeals for a pragmatic species definition. This seabird nests in the west Mediterranean coasts, but its migratory habits, reaching locations as distant from the Mediterranean as the South Atlantic, may help in the dispersal mechanisms of haloarchaea through the Earth’s surface." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d1c71010ea7a617a9ec0ad7c7e1f2664> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The general environmental characteristics of West European coastal dunes and those of salt marshes are outlined. It is pointed out that the dynamical character of the dune system with its interaction between plants and sand in building and degeneration phases has been known for a much longer period of time than generally believed. As to the salt marshes the special significance is discussed of ungrazed marshes; the majority of the marshes having been under a grazing regime for a long time is elucidated. The distinction between internal management is mentioned, i.e. the measures taken to maintain or improve the qualities of an area, versus external management, i.e. the measures to prevent or counteract negative influences from outside the area." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/385e3f4eccd086bcf324dd0abf88582a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Diurnal carbon dioxide exchange patterns of three salt marsh succulents, Borrichia frutescens, Batis maritima and Salicornia virginica, were determined on a seasonal basis in the marsh at Sapelo Island, Georgia. Year-round photosynthetic activity was observed in these species though winter rates of CO2 exchange were reduced. Net primary productivity, estimated using gas exchange techniques, agreed with previously reported harvest data. The role of light and temperature in the control of seasonal photosynthetic changes was investigated. A similar variation in light utilization with season was found in all three species, while seasonal temperature acclimation was species dependent. Less than 20% of fixed CO2 was lost through dark respiration in any of the species. Water use in the salt marsh succulents was found to be relatively inefficient. High rates of transpiration were observed both summer and winter in the succulents. The succulents were judged to be C3 plants on the basis of several criteria." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8e684b46ad20a884d7f3c972c452a2ac> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Seasonal fluctuations of the fauna associated with the water fern,Salvinia molesta growing in a lotic habitat and the fluctuations during the three stages of the fern’s growth in a lentic habitat were studied. As many as 66 species belonging to six phyla were recorded, the major components being crustaceans, insect larvae and gastropods. The density of the fauna of the lotic habitat varied between 1267–7663/kg ofSalvinia, and thatof Salvinia of floating stage, intermediate stage and grown up stage (overcrowded) of the lentic habitat were 9610, 8860, 108 respectively/kg. Prolonged overcrowding ofSalvinia resulted in a sharp decline of the associated fauna." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/619d8ac341b5bc9f1850e3ca844032ec> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary We studied the covariation of six species of cavity-nesting birds to determine the extent to which species' co-occurrence patterns were attributable to interspecific relations. We tested two null hypotheses: (1) inverse relations did not exist among potential competitors for nest trees or nest cavities, and (2) there were no positive relations among potential commensals for nest cavities. Statistical power analyses, and simple, partial, and multiple partial correlation and regression analyses provided little evidence of species-species or higher-order inverse or positive relations. Most of the variation in co-occurrence patterns was associated with stand characteristics. Collectively, an abundance of nest trees and nest cavities, differences among species in acceptable nest-tree and nest-cavity dimensions, and different periods of peak nesting activity appear to be responsible for the lack of negative relations among potential competitors. Positive relations among potential commensals were weak presumably because (1) secondary cavity nesters (SCNs) frequently used cavities that originated from wind-, lightning-, and/or disease-damaged limbs and were thus not dependent completely on primary cavity nesters for cavities, and (2) the lag time for cavity use by SCNs is often two or more seasons. Interspecific relations were apparently not major determinants of community structure during our investigation; assemblages of cavity nesters appeared instead to be influenced more by independent species-specific habitat responses." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/459a637a517887e8d6beae69b280a671> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Tropical provenances of Eucalyptus camaldulensis Dehnh. and E. tereticornis Smith were studied, in their natural habitat in Australia and in a 3.75-year-old progeny trial in Zimbabwe, for their potential to produce medicinal-grade essential oils. Substantial interand intra-specific variation in the contents of five prominent monoterpenes, 1,8-cineole, α-pinene, β-pinene, limonene and p-cymene was found. Plantations of E. camaldulensis established in the wet/dry tropics using seed from Petford in northern Queensland offer immediate potential for oil production. Other widely-planted Queensland provenances with oil potential are Gilbert River Bridge E. camaldulensis and, after some genetic improvement, E. tereticonis from Morehead and Kennedy Rivers. Select individual trees at Petford provide oil of enhanced quality, at about double the yield of ‘average’ trees." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/67ad088dbe3f295d67023c08106ee1ed> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The summer (May–September) time budgets of 14 generalist herbivore species living in the same grassland environment are presented in terms of various component activities (e.g., walking, feeding, resting, etc.). All the species exhibit a decrease in activity as average daily air temperature increases. Greater body size and variety of habitats used by a species lead to increased time spent active. Use of a greater variety of habitats may increase activity time because different habitats provide suitable thermal conditions for activity at different times of the day. Body size affects sn herbivore's thermal balance through metabolism, body surface area and thermal inertia. The time spent feeding, exclusive of time spent searching for foods, is less for large than small herbivores. This may arise because large species must spend more time walking in the search for food to satisfy their energy requirements. The observed feeding time differences for species composing a common trophic level in a single environment may help to explain their diet choice because feeding time constrains the variety of foods an herbivore can select. Diet differences, in turn, can explain the potential competition for food if food is in short supply." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9f01914c583559c4c94c2d0a4d2ddf27> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract. The mangrove vegetation occupies a key position in the livelihood of the people of Zanzibar. About 45% of the total population live along the coast and the majority are involved in the extraction of mangrove wood products and fishing. Between 80% and 90% of the local fishing is concentrated in waters close to mangrove-vegetated areas, creeks and bays. The area under mangrove vegetation, approximately 20,000 ha, is nevertheless only 6% of the total land area and necessarily needs to be used in a sustainable way. Recent efforts to link research findings from studies of aspects of the biology and ecology of the mangroves of Zanzibar and the dependent fisheries, with public awareness programs designed to educate and sensitize the local community, have generated a lot of positive interest in participatory management of the mangrove resources. Awareness of the ecological links between mangrove ecosystems and resources such as fish is key to winning management support. The instillation of a sense of ownership of the resources by the local population and their legal empowerment so that they are able to institute and execute control measures on their resources are also essential components in the process aimed at achieving full community support for the sustainable utilization and management of common resources. Local communities, for example at Kisakasaka village, are beginning to protect and to plan better ways of exploiting their mangrove resources. Based on biological knowledge gleaned through awareness campaigns, they are carrying out mangrove restoration programs with positive results. This short overview discusses some aspects of the biology and ecological roles of the mangroves of Zanzibar and what has happened to help change the attitude of the local coastal community towards the mangrove resources." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/182a88ba4eac121d0b3161200aaab07a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary 1.The arctic population of Clunio marinus in Tromsö (Norway) (69°39′N) shows a tidal periodicity of emergence (period: 12.4 hours). Emergence occurs between the times of high and low tide.2.A semilunar periodicity of pupation could not be detected.3.In accordance with the tidal periodicity of emergence and reproduction, the habitat is situated in the midlittoral zone (area between the high and low water levels of neap tides). High densities of pupation are found in a sandy mud flat.4.The Tromsö population is compared with European populations in temperate latitudes, which are characterized by a semilunar periodicity of emergence, and a habitat around the infralittoral fringe of the midlittoral zone. The different adaptations of the populations in biological rhythms and preferred habitat are discussed with regard to the geographic differences in photoperiodic conditions." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/dec3f865ed2358d62a02d4828bd807c0> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Vicia cracca diploids and autotetraploids are highly parapatric in Europe; tetraploids reside in western and northern part, whereas diploids occupy much drier south-eastern part. They meet together in a Central European contact zone. This distribution pattern raised questions about a transformative effect of polyploidization on plant performance and environmental tolerances. We investigated plant survival, growth, and seed production in two water regimes in a common garden experiment using seeds collected from five localities in the Central European contact zone where diploids and tetraploids occur in sympatry. Obtained data imply that tetraploids of V. cracca are not generally superior in performance to diploids. Significantly larger seeds from tetraploid mother plants collected in the field were not correlated with greater stature of the seedlings. Nonetheless, tetraploids might have a potential to out-compete diploids in the long run due to the tetraploids’ ability of greater growth which manifested in the second year of cultivation. Considering the response of diploids and tetraploids to water supply, drought stressed tetraploids but not diploids produced a higher proportion of aborted seeds than watered ones, which implies that tetraploids are more drought susceptible than diploids. On the other hand, decreased plant height in drought stresses tetraploids, which simultaneously increased total seed production, may suggest that tetraploids have a greater ability to avoid local extinction under unfavourable conditions by enhancing biomass allocation into production of seeds at the cost of lower growth. The significant interaction between ploidy level and locality in several traits suggests possible polyfyletic origin of tetraploids and the necessity to clarify the history of the tetraploids in Europe." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/1eb6fde85653e508f01a557f9b6cf10c> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Future ecosystem properties of grasslands will be driven largely by belowground biomass responses to climate change, which are challenging to understand due to experimental and technical constraints. We used a multi-faceted approach to explore single and combined impacts of elevated CO2 and warming on root carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) dynamics in a temperate, semiarid, native grassland at the Prairie Heating and CO2 Enrichment experiment. To investigate the indirect, moisture mediated effects of elevated CO2, we included an irrigation treatment. We assessed root standing mass, morphology, residence time and seasonal appearance/disappearance of community-aggregated roots, as well as mass and N losses during decomposition of two dominant grass species (a C3 and a C4). In contrast to what is common in mesic grasslands, greater root standing mass under elevated CO2 resulted from increased production, unmatched by disappearance. Elevated CO2 plus warming produced roots that were longer, thinner and had greater surface area, which, together with greater standing biomass, could potentially alter root function and dynamics. Decomposition increased under environmental conditions generated by elevated CO2, but not those generated by warming, likely due to soil desiccation with warming. Elevated CO2, particularly under warming, slowed N release from C4—but not C3—roots, and consequently could indirectly affect N availability through treatment effects on species composition. Elevated CO2 and warming effects on root morphology and decomposition could offset increased C inputs from greater root biomass, thereby limiting future net C accrual in this semiarid grassland." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d51b6fe888286dee87fa8fc38d2d3ac5> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract This paper is centered on the specific effects of plants on the soil weathering environment; we attempt to address how to quantify this component of the ecosystem and assess feedbacks between plants and weathering processes that influence the degree and rates of mineral weathering. The basic processes whereby plants directly influence the soil chemical environment is through the generation of weathering agents, biocycling of cations, and the production of biogenic minerals. Plants may indirectly influence soil processes through the alteration of regional hydrology and local soil hydrologic regime which determines the residence time of water available for weathering. We provide a brief review of the current state of knowledge regarding the effects of plants on mineral weathering and critical knowledge gaps are highlighted. We summarize approaches that may be used to help quantify the effects of plants on soil weathering such as state factor analyses, mass balance approaches, laboratory batch experiments and isotopic techniques. We assess the changes in the soil chemical environment along a tropical bioclimatic gradient and identify the possible effects of plant production on the soil mineralogical composition. We demonstrate that plants are important in the transfer of atmospheric carbon dioxide into the mineral weathering cycle and speculate how this may be related to ecosystem properties such as NPP. In the soils of Hawaiian rainforests subjected to deforestation, pasture grasses appear to change the proportion of non crystalline to crystalline minerals by altering the soil hydrologic regime or partitioning silica into more stable biogenic forms. A better understanding of the relationship between soil weathering processes and ecosystem productivity will assist in the construction predictive models capable of evaluating the sensitivity of biogeochemical cycles to perturbations." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8c39d524bfb0a8bccf3e249798b4c01a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Habitat disturbance, particularly of human origin, promotes the invasion of exotic plants, which in turn might foster the invasion of alien-interacting animals. Here we assess whether the invasion of exotic plants – mostly mediated by habitat disturbance – facilitates the invasion of exotic flower visitors in temperate forests of the southern Andes, Argentina. We recorded visit frequencies and the identity of visitors to the flowers of 15 native and 15 exotic plant species occurring in different highly disturbed and less disturbed habitats. We identified three alien flower visitors, the hymenopterans Apis mellifera, Bombus ruderatus, and Vespula germanica. We found significantly more visitation by exotic insects in disturbed habitats. This pattern was explained, at least in part, by the association between alien flower visitors and flowers of exotic plants, which occurred more frequently in disturbed habitats. However, this general pattern masked different responses between the two main alien flower visitors. Apis mellifera exploited almost exclusively the flowers of a subset of herbaceous exotic plants that thrive under disturbance, whereas B. ruderatus visited equally flowers of both exotic and native plants in both disturbed and undisturbed habitats. We did not find any strong evidence that flowers of exotic plants were more generalist than those of native plants, or that exotic flower visitors were more generalist than their native counterparts. Our results suggest that alien plant species could facilitate the invasion of at least some exotic flower visitors to disturbed habitats. Because flowering plants as well as flower visitors benefit from this mutualism, this association may enhance, through a positive feedback, successful establishment of both exotic partners." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/6b450f3008f66d17c52c01d824bcd485> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Populations of the planktonic copepod, Diaptomus sanguineus, live in permanent and temporary freshwater ponds in Rhode Island. All ponds in which they occur become uninhabitable at some time during the year, but the nature and timing of the harsh period varies both spatially and temporally. Females produce discrete clutches either of subitaneous eggs which hatch immediately or of diapausing eggs which hatch the following season. The two egg types show distinct chorion morphologies under transmission electron microscopy. In permanent ponds the copepods start making diapausing eggs in March, one month before rising water temperatures induce planktivorous sunfish to become active. In temporary ponds diapausing eggs are produced, in a complex pattern from May to July, before the water disappears in late summer or early fall. We investigated the spatial scale at which D. sanguineus is adapted to this complex environment. In a reciprocal transfer experiment between temporary and permanent bodies of water, female copepods placed in new ponds made subies of water, female copepods placed in new ponds made subitaneous and diapausing eggs in the same sequence as control females retained in their home ponds. The copepod populations enter diapause at times appropriate for the local habitat conditions they experience, but inappropriate for other, nearby ponds. Transplanted females were unable to sense a change in pond type or to adjust egg production accordingly. We conclude that D. sanguineus populations are adapted to the specific conditions of isolated ponds rather than to a broader geographical region containing several pond types." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/1c4957881270a77f3357e4a192f16a8c> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Harsh physical conditions in the intertidal zone are the cause of an ample amount of dead macroinvertebrates, which constitute a food source for carrion-feeders. In the European Wadden Sea, this trophic guild includes decapod crustaceans and fish when the tide is in, while during nocturnal low tides the polychaete Phyllodoce mucosa is attracted in large numbers by dead mollusks, crabs or worms on the sediment surface. Within 10 s worms emerged to the surface, crawled as far as 15 m on mucus trails towards the carcass, sucked in tissue up to one-third of their own weight, and then quickly retreated to below the surface. Abundance of P. mucosa was highest in the lower intertidal zone and winter. The seaward high abundance pattern, however, did not continue into the shallow subtidal. In summer, few were attracted during daytime or when the tide was in. However, up to 447 worms aggregated at a single crushed mussel within 20 min at dusk during low-tide exposure. This study suggests that during winter carrion-feeding is an important trophic niche on cold-temperate, intertidal mud flats occupied by a phyllodocid polychaete that is segregated in feeding time from most other scavengers and benefits from cold-sensitive benthic invertebrates." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e33928c6f9dc4e2d6018b77564efd64a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Over the past four decades, many researchers have applied the theory of island biogeography (IBT) to predict and understand species loss and distribution in fragmented landscapes. Recent studies found that specialist species were more affected by fragment size and isolation than generalists. However, the mechanisms underlying different effects of area and isolation among specialists and generalists are unknown. We tested the predictions of IBT on butterfly assemblages in Tokyo, Japan, and hypothesized that the effects of fragment size and isolation would be stronger for specialists than for generalists. We classified butterfly species into specialists and generalists for each of two dimensions (food range and voltinism) and according to tolerance to the matrix. We recorded 26 feeding specialists and 27 generalists, 24 seasonal specialists and 29 generalists, 32 low matrix-tolerant species and 21 high matrix-tolerant species in 20 forest fragments. We used generalized linear models to relate the number of species in a fragment to fragment size and isolation (distance to the mainland). The averaged models based on AICc showed that fragment size had positive and significant effects on both specialist and generalist and high matrix-tolerant butterfly species richness. However, the negative effects of isolation on species richness were only found in specialist and low matrix-tolerant species. Our results demonstrate that patch isolation only affects specialist species. This suggests that when applying IBT to terrestrial fragmented landscapes, researchers should be careful not to overlook patch area and isolation effects on specialists." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/028ac67230273429666ed3523762f7da> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Wildfires are frequent boreal forest disturbances in Canada, and emulating their patterns with forest harvesting has emerged as a common forest management goal. Wildfires contain many patches of residual vegetation of various size, shape, and composition; understanding their characteristics provides insights for improved emulation criteria. We studied the occurrence of residual vegetation within eleven boreal wildfire events in a natural setting; fires ignited by lightning, no suppression efforts, and no prior anthropogenic disturbances. Relative importance of the measurable geo-environmental factors and their marginal effects on residual presence are studied using Random Forests. These factors included distance from natural firebreaks (wetland, bedrock and non-vegetated areas, and water), land cover, and topographic variables (elevation, slope, and ruggedness index). We present results at spatial resolutions ranging from four to 64 m while emphasizing four and 32 m since they mimic IKONOS- and Landsat-type images. Natural firebreak features, especially the proximity to wetlands, are among the most important variables that explain the likelihood residual occurrence. The majority of residual vegetation areas are concentrated within 100 m of wetlands. Topographic variables, typically important in rugged terrain, are less important in explaining the presence of residuals within our study fires." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/78d549077c2169a8f512f672df9c7c04> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Plant species composition, dominance, richness, and diversity were measured across a 15-year chronosequence of created wetland sites in Virginia, USA. Using an age-class categorization (1–2 years, 3–5 years, 6–10 years, or 11–15 years), all classes had a predominance of herbaceous species with perennial life history strategy, and perennials contributed 68.6 % to the overall dominance measure (importance value; IV) averaged across all sites. There was no significant difference in species richness or diversity among age classes. Analysis of Similarity (ANOSIM) indicated that herbaceous species composition was similar between the youngest and oldest age classes, but not the intermediate classes. For woody shrubs and saplings, planted species were more prevalent in the youngest age classes, and volunteer species predominated in the oldest age classes. These results suggest that perennial herbaceous species are important in early plant development on created wetland sites, and may be influential in observed patterns of species composition over time. In the context of plant development in newly created wetlands, dominance shifts from planted to volunteer woody species suggest that planting early successional species, or species with reproductive strategies attuned to created wetland site management, may favor survivorship and recruitment of other species over time." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/fa545a3292a27dc131a8dd7d6388f0a4> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract. Intraspecific and interspecific effects on the growth and body size of helminths are rarely studied in natural situations, yet knowing what determines helminth sizes and thus fecundity is crucial to our understanding of helminth ecology and epidemiology. The determinants of average individual worm mass were investigated in four common species of helminths parasitic in trout, Salmo trutta. In the acanthocephalan Echinorhynchus truttae, there was a negative relationship between the intensity of infection by conspecifics and average individual worm size. However, in the acanthocephalans Pomphorhynchus laevis and Acanthocephalus anguillae and in the cestode Cyathocephalus truncatus, the relationship was positive: individual worms were larger on average when co-occurring with many conspecifics than when co-occurring with very few. In addition, the average mass of individual C. truncatus in a host decreased as the total mass of other helminth species in the same host increased. This interspecific effect involves the whole helminth community, as the combined effect of all other helminth species is a better predictor of reduced mass in C. truncatus than the mass of any other species taken on its own. These results illustrate the importance of considering helminth interactions and helminth growth in a natural setting." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e42cd2d2cc11e6afb2c1abe4dc574b7d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The role of seed germination in contributing to species ecological breadth and geographic distribution is still a matter of debate. Here, we attempted to relate seed germination requirements with ecological breadth in 12 bromeliad species from heterogeneous montane vegetation in southeastern Brazil. Seeds were set to germinate under both light and dark conditions at a broad range of temperatures to determine the breadth of the germination niche. We ran a RLQ analysis based on the matrices of species occurrence, environmental parameters and germination traits and found a significant association between germination traits, and the characteristics of sites where adult plants occur. The variation of germination responses to environmental factors was not random with habitat-generalist plants having broader germination niches and habitat-specialist plants having narrower germination niches. The RLQ analysis showed that substrate moisture and light environment were the most important factors correlated with germination traits. Phylogenetic niche conservatism appears to play a role in the patterns found here, especially in the Tillandsioideae. There is an association between the regeneration niche of a species and its ecological range, and this also provides support for the idea that the regeneration niche may help assemble plant species into heterogeneous, species-rich communities." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9249c0d19e7298da67d0b0e8fc0a529c> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Modern concepts on structural, physiological, and biochemical aspects of salt tolerance of higher plants were considered. Integral physiological processes, such as growth and photosynthesis of glycophytes and halophytes in the context of their ecological plasticity, variety of their adaptive strategies developed in the course of their evolution, and natural selection, were discussed. Analysis of the known anatomical and morphological adaptations of halophytes (succulence, special salt-excreting structures, features associated with special tissues growth, leaf kranz-anatomy and mesostructure) providing their salt tolerance was conducted. The most important physiological and biochemical adaptations of such plants to salinity related to uptake, accumulation and excretion of Na+ and Cl–, peculiarities of membrane composition and the pigment system, and protection against osmotic and oxidative stresses were described. The association of physiological and biochemical peculiarities of halophytes with ecological salt tolerance strategy was discussed." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/0ecc2bd1cd1d54304ccaebf9e37a4ab6> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The early life period is characterized by fast growth and development, which can lead to high reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Young animals thus have to balance their investment in growth versus ROS defence, and this balance is likely mediated by resource availability. Consequently resources transferred prenatally by the mother and nutritional conditions experienced shortly after birth may crucially determine the oxidative status of young animals. Here, we experimentally investigated the relative importance of pre- and early postnatal nutritional conditions on the oxidative status of great tit nestlings (Parus major). We show that resources transferred by the mother through the egg and nutritional conditions encountered after hatching affect the oxidative status of nestling in a sex-specific way. Daughters of non-supplemented mothers and daughters which did not receive extra food during the early postnatal period had higher oxidative damage than sons, while no differences between sons and daughters were found when extra food was provided pre- or postnatally. No effect of the food supplementations on growth, fledging mass or tarsus length was observed, indicating that female nestlings maintained their investment in growth at the expense of ROS defence mechanisms when resources were limited. The lower priority of the antioxidant defence system for female nestlings was also evidenced by lower levels of specific antioxidant components. These results highlight the important role of early parental effects in shaping oxidative stress in the offspring, and show that the sensitivity to these parental effects is sex-specific." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2f85626695c2ff9d57ceeb66d3efb188> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Coarse woody debris (CWD) is an important and particular component of forest ecosystems and is extremely important to forest health. This review describes the decomposition process, decomposition model and influence factors. CWD decomposition is a complex and continuous process and characterizes many biological and physical processes, including biological respiration, leaching, and fragmentation. All these processes have closed relationships between each other and work synergistically. During decomposition, there are many controlling factors mainly including site conditions (temperature, humidity, and O2/CO2 concentration), woody substrate quality (diameter, species and compound) and organism in CWD. The decomposition rate is generally expresses through a constant k which indicate the percent mass, volume or density loss over time, and can be determined by long-term monitoring, chronosequence approach and the radio between input and the total mass. Now using mathematical models to simulate decomposition patterns and estimate the decomposition rate is widely applied, especially the exponential model. We brought forward that managing and utilizing for the CWD in forest was a primary objective on all forest lands. And it is should be intensified to integrate many related research subjects and to carry a comprehensive, long-term and multi-scale research which mainly focus on seven sections." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/14aaa98057dcb2930bf1f5fe2bcdcad8> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Experimentation using field-based artificial streams provides a promising, complimentary approach to biomonitoring assessments because artificial streams provide control over relevant environmental variables and true replication of treatments. We have used large and small artificial stream systems, based in the field, to examine the effect of treated bleached kraft pulp mill effluent (BKME) on the benthos of three large rivers in western Canada. Under natural regimes of temperature, water chemistry, and insolation, these artificial streams provide current velocities and substrata to food chains or food webs that are representative of those in the study river. With these tools we have shown that BKME stimulated mayfly growth in the Thompson River above that which could be accounted for by fertilization of their algal food supply. In contrast, moulting frequency was inhibited at high BKME concentrations. Results from artificial streams also indicate that increased algal biomass and abundances of benthic communities downstream of BKME outfalls were induced by nutrient enrichment from the effluent. BKME treatments did not change diatom species richness in the Fraser River, or diatom species diversity in either the Athabasca or Fraser Rivers. Artificial streams provide a means of understanding the mechanisms of stressor effects over a continuum ranging from single stressor effects on specific taxa to the effects of multiple stressors on communities and ecosystems. Because riverside deployment provides environmental realism within a replicated experimental design, this approach can (i) address questions that cannot be examined using laboratory tests or field observations, (ii) improve our mechanistic understanding of stressor effects on riverine ecosystems, and (iii) can contribute directly to the development, parameterization, and testing of models for predicting ecosystem-level responses." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/c8a9d8ef01b6494eba9b63f583693741> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Isoprene (2-methyl-1,3,-butadiene), produced by many woody and a few herbaceous plant species, is the dominant volatile organic compound released from vegetation. It represents a non-trivial carbon loss to the plant (typically 0.5–2%, but much higher as temperatures exceed 30°C), and plays a major role in tropospheric chemistry of forested regions, contributing to ozone formation. This review summarizes current knowledge concerning the occurrence of isoprene production within the plant kingdom, and discusses other aspects of isoprene biology which may be of interest to the ecological community. The ability to produce significant amounts of isoprene may or may not be shared by members of the same plant family or genus, but emitting species have been found among bryophytes, ferns, conifers and Ephedra and in approximately one-third of the 122 angiosperm families examined. No phylogenetic pattern is obvious among the angiosperms, with the trait widely scattered and present (and absent) in both primitive and derived taxa, although confined largely to woody species. Isoprene is not stored within the leaf, and plays no known ecological role as, for example, an anti-herbivore or allelopathic agent. The primary short-term controls over isoprene production are light and temperature. Growth in high light stimulates isoprene production, and growth in cool conditions apparently inhibits isoprene, production of which may be induced upon transfer to warmer temperatures. The stimulation of isoprene production by high irradiance and warm temperatures suggests a possible role in ameliorating stresses associated with warm, high-light environments, a role consistent with physiological evidence indicating a role in thermal protection." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/1eace2a5bc68c72845b876b33e37fab9> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Korea has large diversity in Lilium germplasm and approximately 15 different species of lilies grow naturally. In present study, a comprehensive evaluation of habitat associations and distribution patterns of Lilium tsingtauense in Korea was carried out. A total of 26 natural habitats of L. tsingtauense were investigated and data regarding its ecological and morphological characteristics under different geological and environmental conditions were collected. During survey it was observed that this species was well distributed nationwide with highly variable altitudes such as Jindo Island (82 m) and Mt. Jiri (1182 m). Most (84%) of natural habitats of this species were found in the northern slopes of mountains and the remainder (15%) habitats were present in the southern regions. Flowers with upward facing had no fragrance and flowering time of this species was in between early July to mid-July. Colonies of Larix leptolepis, as well as 106 other plant species, were mainly found in these natural habitats. The soil was strongly acidic, within the pH range of 4.3-5.3. EC, organic content, total-nitrogen content, and CEC varied among natural habitats. Most of the soils of the natural habitats were sandy loam with low clay ratios. This study can provide baseline information regarding the effective exploitation and use of L. tsingtauense resources for breeding research." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b90c65127d8143944d6721bb246d5192> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary: For Melipona fasciata, M. beecheii, M. favosa and Tetragonisca angustula we found distinct intergeneric differences in foraging activity patterns. The Melipona species had a longer daily foraging activity period than T. angustula. Pollen foraging patterns of the Melipona species were different from that of T. angustula: Melipona collect pollen earlier in the day. In an experimental habitat without competitors, Melipona favosa did not collect pollen very early in the day. ¶Individually marked returning foragers demonstrated in the course of the day distinct differences in nature and frequency of interactions with nest mates. Individual foraging flight frequency was lower and the intranidal transfer of nectar was delayed when syrup of a lower concentration was offered. ¶The regulation of daily foraging activity patterns and the nectar foraging behaviour of individual worker bees are discussed." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4cfb714db7c6a74b3eeda375ac347a87> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Three sympatric species of Neotoma occur in the southern Great Basin Desert in northern Arizona. Observations and experiments from 1980–1984 focused on diet and den selection to determine to what extent woodrats partition available food and shelter. Analyses included microscopic inspection of feces from live-trapped animals, forage moisture content, and seasonal habitat utilization. Each species of woodrat was found to selectively forage on a different genus of the three evergreens on the study site: N. albigula was the only species to eat appreciable amounts of Yucca, while N. devia, specialized on Ephedra epidermis, and N. stephensi on Juniperus. Observations in the laboratory showed a linear dominance hierarchy where the larger species dominated smaller ones, i.e., N. albigula>N. stephensi>N. devia. To determine if such a hierarchy existed in the field, the behaviorally dominant species (N. albigula and N. stephensi) were continually removed (from a 25 ha experimental plot) over a 12-month period leaving only the subordinate species (N. devia) in the area. In these experiments, 40% of the “dominant”-species dens became occupied by 20 of the “subordinate”-species on the removal plot, whereas there were no interspecific den site (n=39) changes among species on the control plot. Removal of the two dominant Neotoma spp resulted in an increase of N. devia from a pre-removal high of 16 to a post-removal population of 26 individuals. These data suggest that while these woodrats may not compete for food, the subordinate species compete with the dominant species for den sites, prime dens being sequestered by the behaviorally dominant species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ba8c910f0ad93b8f8ae6240948b77ef2> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Polyethism was quantified in post-emergence colonies of the primitively eusocial wasp,Polistes instabilis, and compared to polyethism in a sympatric advanced eusocial wasp,Polybia occidentalis. Like P.occidentalis, P. instabilis foragers collected food (nectar and prey) and nest materials (wood pulp and water).P. instabilis foragers showed some evidence of specialization with respect to which materials they gathered, but most foragers, divided their effort among food and nest materials, a pattern that is rarely seen inP. occidentalis. In colonies of both species, more foragers collected nectar than any other material; in contrast, most water foraging was performed by one or two workers. Upon returning to the nest,P. instabilis foragers gave up part or all of most nectar, prey, and pulp loads to nestmates, while water was rarely partitioned. Prey loads were most likely to be given up entirely.P. instabilis workers show evidence of conflict over the handling of materials at the nest. The frequency with which workers took portions of nectar loads from forgers was positively correlated with their frequency of aggressive dominant behavior, and with their frequency of taking other foraged materials. Compared to polyethism inP. occidentalis P. instabilis showed less individual specialization on foraging tasks and less partitioning of foraged materials with nestmates, suggesting that these characteristics of polyethism have been modified during the evolution of advanced insect societies." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/74cb54a4da939af9a77501c1b79fb61a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Temperature is both a selective pressure and a modulator of the diapause expression in insects from temperate regions. Thus, with climate warming, an alteration of the response to seasonal changes is expected, either through genetic adaptations to novel climatic conditions or phenotypic plasticity. Since the 1980s in western France, the winter guild of aphid parasitoids (Hymenoptera: Braconidae) in cereal fields has been made up of two species: Aphidius rhopalosiphi and Aphidius matricariae. The recent activity of two other species, Aphidius avenae and Aphidius ervi, during the winter months suggests that a modification of aphid parasitoid overwintering strategies has taken place within the guild. In this study, we first performed a field survey in the winter of 2014/15 to assess levels of parasitoid diapause incidence in agrosystems. Then, we compared the capacity of the four parasitoid species to enter winter diapause under nine different photoperiods and temperature conditions in the laboratory. As predicted, historically winter-active species (A. rhopalosiphi and A. matricariae) never entered diapause, whereas the species more recently active during winter (A. avenae and A. ervi) did enter diapause but at a low proportion (maximum of 13.4 and 11.2%, respectively). These results suggest rapid shifts over the last three decades in the overwintering strategies of aphid parasitoids in Western France, probably due to climate warming. This implies that diapause can be replaced by active adult overwintering, with potential consequences for species interactions, insect community composition, ecosystem functioning, and natural pest control." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/48eca65aafd6b5ad2e44320840101de4> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary A new species of yam (Dioscorea orangeana Wilkin) is described and illustrated. It differs from D. comorensis R.Knuth by having undulate leaf margins and a broader torus and tepals in both the male and female flowers. In female flowers of D. orangeana the floral stipe between the ovary and the torus is shorter than in D. comorensis. The tuber morphology of the species is atypical among Malagasy species in that there are several digitate lobes rather than a single tuber per growing season, although more research is needed on tuber morphology. D. orangeana is reported to be edible. It is endemic to the Forêt d’Orangea near Diego Suarez (Antsiranana) in Antsiranana Préfecture. Its conservation and sustainable use are thus matters of concern." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/c5117f3bd001e6da79ff0c14be98b224> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Amylase inhibitor producing actinobacteria were isolated and characterized from terrestrial environment and there is no much report found from marine environment, hence in the present study, 17 strains isolated from the rhizosphere sediments of mangroves were tested for their amylase inhibition ability. Seawater requirement test for the growth of actinobacteria found that the strains SSR-3, SSR-12 and SSR-16 requires at least 50% and SSR-6 requires at least 25% seawater for their growth. The inhibition activity of both prokaryotic and eukaryotic amylase was tested by using Bacillus subtilis and Aspergillus niger. The maximum amylase activity (40mm) produced by the A. niger was taken as positive control, when the test actinobacteria strains grown in the medium they inhibited amylase activity and was evidenced by the reduction in inhibition zone (14–37 mm) similarly the amylase produced by the Bacillus subtilis was also recorded maximum (35 mm) amylase activity and was taken as positive control, and the test atinobacterial strains reduced enzyme action(12–33 mm) it varied levals. This indicates that the actinobacteria strains were controlled amylase enzyme activity in both the cases. The strain SSR-10 was highly effective and SSR-8 was less effective in inhibiting eukaryotic amylase produced by A. niger. The strain SSR-2 was effective and SSR-6 showed very less effect in inhibiting the prokaryotic amylase produced by the B subtilis." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e9820f494cfdc3e117f080a5bc61ef9b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Carbon dioxide is released from the soil to the atmosphere in heterotrophic respiration when the dead organic matter is used for substrates for soil micro-organisms and soil animals. Respiration of roots and mycorrhiza is another major source of carbon dioxide in soil CO2 efflux. The partitioning of these two fluxes is essential for understanding the carbon balance of forest ecosystems and for modelling the carbon cycle within these ecosystems. In this study, we determined the carbon balance of three common tree species in boreal forest zone, Scots pine, Norway spruce, and Silver birch with gas exchange measurements conducted in laboratory in controlled temperature and light conditions. We also studied the allocation pattern of assimilated carbon with 14C pulse labelling experiment. The photosynthetic light responses of the tree species were substantially different. The maximum photosynthetic capacity (P max) was 2.21 μg CO2 s−1 g−1 in Scots pine, 1.22 μg CO2 s−1 g−1 in Norway spruce and 3.01 μg CO2 s−1 g−1 in Silver birch seedlings. According to the pulse labelling experiments, 43–75% of the assimilated carbon remained in the aboveground parts of the seedlings. The amount of carbon allocated to root and rhizosphere respiration was about 9–26%, and the amount of carbon allocated to root and ectomycorrhizal biomass about 13–21% of the total assimilated CO2. The 14CO2 pulse reached the root system within few hours after the labelling and most of the pulse had passed the root system after 48 h. The transport rate of carbon from shoot to roots was fastest in Silver birch seedlings." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/045fcea3653e62dae2d8eacb786a40c7> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Lime aphids feed on the contents of sieve tubes in the leaf veins. Aphids on the undersides of large leaves tend to select the smallest veins, while those on small leaves tend to select the larger veins. This tendency increases with the size of the aphid. Since only 4% of the total leaf area is covered by the larger veins, crowding is imposed on those aphids feeding from them. In spring, when the leaves are young and small, close spacing of the aphids results due to their tendency to select large veins. In summer, when the leaves are mature and large, wider spacing between aphids occurs due to their tendency to occupy more of the leaf surface." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/719228653a8ce00eaf4845db858d5bf6> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Using column and thin layer chromatography, plasma hydrolysis of leu-enkephalin has been studied in man and several laboratory animals. The hydrolysis kinetics determined in the various species examined are considerably different. In addition, also the enzyme forms evidentiated, their molecular weight distribution and relative ratios have been found to vary greatly in the animals under test. Our data suggest that the widely different hydrolysis kinetics reported by various authors are attributable to the differences between species, rather than to differences in the analytical techniques employed." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/51c228b32469ea472424495257c1bd4b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary We tested the hypothesis that synchronous fluctuations in small game species in boreal Fennoscandia are caused by varying predation pressure. The main prey of predators are the cyclically superabundant voles. Small game species (alternative prey) are rare compared to voles. The following 4 predictions were checked: (1) Predators should shift their diet from main prey to alternative prey as main prey decline. — This was confirmed using data on red fox (Vulpes vulpes L.) diet.; (2) The mortality rate of alternative prey should be inversely correlated to the abundance of main prey. — This was true for mountain hare (Lepus timidus L.) mortality rates and the rate of nest predation on black grouse (Tetrao tetrix L.).; (3) The total consumption of prey by all the predators should at least equal the critical losses in alternative prey during a decline year. — A tentative estimate of predator consumption amounted to 10 times the losses in grouse and hare.; and (4) The absence of synchrony between the species in the boreonemoral region should be associated with a more diverse diet of predators. — This was the case for red fox diets throughout Sweden. Although all 4 predictions were confirmed, we could not necessarily exclude other hypotheses involving changes in quality or quantity of plant food." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/0493722e0c8379cd24fcf873b3ccce31> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract We consider a mathematical model of nutrient-autotroph-herbivore interaction with nutrient recycling from both autotroph and herbivore. Local and global stability criteria of the model are studied in terms of system parameters. Next we incorporate the time required for recycling of nutrient from herbivore as a constant discrete time delay. The resulting DDE model is analyzed regarding stability and bifurcation aspects. Finally, we assume the recycling delay in the oscillatory form to model the daily variation in nutrient recycling and deduce the stability criteria of the variable delay model. A comparison of the variable delay model with the constant delay one is performed to unearth the biological relevance of oscillating delay in some real world ecological situations. Numerical simulations are done in support of analytical results." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b09dea77f5d13b595af98d9a757b83e6> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Background and aimsPrecipitation and nitrogen (N) deposition are predicted to increase in northern China. The present paper aimed to better understand how different dominant species in semi-arid grasslands in this region vary in their litter decomposition and nutrient release responses to increases in precipitation and N deposition. MethodsAbove-ground litter of three dominant species (two grasses, Agropyron cristatum and Stipa krylovii, and one forb, Artemisia frigida) was collected from areas without experimental treatments in a semi-arid grassland in Inner Mongolia. Litter decomposition was studied over three years to determine the effects of water and N addition on litter decomposition rate and nutrient dynamics. ResultsLitter mass loss and nutrient release were faster for the forb species than for the two grasses during decomposition. Both water and N addition increased litter mass loss of the grass A. cristatum, while the treatments showed no impacts on that of the forb A. frigida. Supplemental N had time-dependent, positive effects on litter mass loss of the grass S. krylovii. During the three-year decomposition study, the release of N from litter was inhibited by N addition for the three species, and it was promoted by water addition for the two grasses. Across all treatments, N and potassium (K) were released from the litter of all three species, whereas calcium (Ca) was accumulated. Phosphorus (P) and magnesium (Mg) were released from the forb litter but accumulated in the grass litter after three years of decomposition. ConclusionsOur findings revealed that the litter decomposition response to water and N supplementation differed among dominant plant species in a semi-arid grassland, indicating that changes in dominant plant species induced by projected increases in precipitation and N deposition are likely to affect litter decomposition, nutrient cycling, and further biogeochemical cycles in this grassland. The asynchronous nutrient release of different species’ litter found in the present study highlights the complexity of nutrient replenishment from litter decomposition in the temperate steppe under scenarios of enhancing precipitation and N deposition." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e8f1e96cf80535e396740745710a64e3> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary As an extension of earlier investigations, the mating calls ofHyla arborea kretensis, Hyla a. molleri, andHyla a. sarda were studied, and variations in the calls with air temperature were determined. The mating calls of these species exhibit the typical structure, made up of short pulses of varying amplitude. The call duration and the inter-call interval decrease linearly with increasing temperature (over the range in which calls can occur), whereas the number of pulses per call does not change. Comparisons of the structure of the mating calls make it possible to assess the relationships among the European tree frogs, which so far have been regarded as subspecies of just one species.Hyla meridionalis represents a valid species; this is certainly also true ofHyla a. savignyi of the Middle East.Hyla arborea arborea andHyla a. sarda can be considered as subspecies, whereasHyla a. kretensis andHyla a. molleri cannot." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9c9df4af0d1bb75c8174230556cb5b82> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The structure and fine structure of the pars distalis hypophyseos was examined in five species of Tilapia fishes (T. alcalica, T. grahami, T. leucosticta, T. zillii, T. nigra) which were collected from lakes of a wide range of salinities. The pars distalis in all the species is composed of 5 granulated (“secretory”) and 1 chromophobic cell types. The rostral pars distalis prolactin cells appear most numerous and active in the fresh water species and smaller and least active in the “soda” lake fish. The evidence from nuclear measurements suggests that the species adapted to hyposmotic media have compensated for the freshwater environment (and the subsequent need for greater prolactin secretion) by increasing the number of prolactin cells rather than by increasing the synthetic activity of individual cells. In “soda” lake species which were acclimated to fresh water the prolactin cells are markedly hyperactive and degranulated when compared with any other group. The ACTH cells appear more active in the “soda” lake species than in the fresh water groups, however, these cells are maximally active in “soda” lake fish acclimated to fresh water. The rostral pars distalis stellate cells are described and discussed in relation to their possible involvement in the release of hormone from the pars distalis “secretory” cells. The proximal pars distalis somatotrophs appear active in all the species investigated although they were maximally active in fresh water acclimated “soda” lake species. The structure of the proximal pars distalis gonadotrophs and thyrotrophs is variable both within the same animal and between the species but the variation is not consistent with environmental salinity parameters. The means by which granules are released from the different cell types is discussed. The work was supported by grants in aid of research from SRC (J.F.L), University of Nairobi (J. F. L. and M. H), NRC (J.F.L.), USPMS (AM 13795, J. N. B.), Munitarp Foundation (M. H.) and by a travel scholarship from the Royal Society (J.F.L.). The paper is number 091 in the physiology of migration series." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/cfdcde9874f86d1fa033a53294ca682c> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The impact of mechanical cutting for weed control along vegetated irrigation canals in terms of Manning's n, is discussed. Flow resistance was measured in channels completely infested by submerged macrophytes. Next, a path was cut along one or both canal banks by mechanical means and the measurement of flow resistance was repeated. The experiments and measurements carried out during only one seasson are described. A series of relationships between the flow resistance and a cross-section of areas both free from vegetation and with vegetation density, respectively, were found. Clearly, the elucidation of such relationships will be useful in assessing the frictional effects of submerged macrophyte growths in relation to the design and management of irrigation and drainage channels." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/5c73413739b2fc1cc7192b124158f33b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Apex predators play an important role in shaping ecosystem structure. They may suppress smaller predators (mesopredators) but also subsidize scavengers via carrion provisioning. However, the importance of these interactions can change with ecosystem context. The wolverine (Gulo gulo) is a cold-adapted carnivore and facultative scavenger. It has a circumboreal distribution, where it could be either suppressed or subsidized by larger predators. In Scandinavia, the wolverine might interact with two larger predators, wolf (Canis lupus) and lynx (Lynx lynx), but human persecution decimated the populations in the nineteenth and early twentieth century. We investigated potential relationships between wolverine and the larger predators using hunting bag statistics from 15 Norwegian and Swedish counties in 1846–1922. Our best models showed a positive association between wolverine and lynx trends, taking ecological and human factors into account. There was also a positive association between year-to-year fluctuations in wolverine and wolf in the latter part of the study period. We suggest these associations could result from positive lynx–wolverine interactions through carrion provisioning, while wolves might both suppress wolverine and provide carrion with the net effect becoming positive when wolf density drops below a threshold. Wolverines could thus benefit from lynx presence and low-to-intermediate wolf densities." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/5091ca73955b738ce43329ce1da317cf> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The diversity and community structure of planktonic Actinobacteria in a freshwater river and five fresh/saline/hypersaline lakes on the Tibetan Plateau, China were investigated with a combination of geochemical and 16S rRNA gene phylogenetic analyses. A total of 387 actinobacterial 16S rRNA gene clones were sequenced, and they could be classified into Actinobacteridae, Acidimicrobidae, and unclassified Actinobacteria. The Actinobacteridae sequences were distributed into five suborders (e.g., Corynebacterineae, Frankineae, Micrococcineae, Propionibacterineae, and Streptosporangineae) and unclassified Actinobacteridae. Some actinobacterial members (specifically Micrococcineae) were present in a wide range of salinities (from freshwater to NaCl saturation). Statistical analysis showed that salinity and salinity-related environmental variables (such as ions and total nitrogen) significantly (r > 0.5; P < 0.05) influenced the distribution of planktonic actinobacterial community in the investigated aquatic biotopes. Our data have implications for a better understanding of the distribution of Actinobacteria in high-elevation lakes." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ef8559ecbcb7ecfbc40a37c5399245b9> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The general mathematical theory of the gradostat is presented for two competitors. The gradostat provides a mechanism for studying competition along a nutrient gradient. In the two vessel case, the results are complete and the conditions are testable. In then-vessel case, the relevant conditions are stated in terms of the stability modulii of certain matrices and are testable for any specific case." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b012ce4e4192a283c7de75bd4f2a478f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The waters around the Pribilof Islands in the southeast Bering Sea are a center of abundance for age-0 walleye pollock (Theragra chalcogramma). Each spring and summer a tidal front is formed around the islands separating a well-mixed inshore habitat from a stratified offshore habitat. The objective of this study was to assess the foraging impact on zooplankton by age-0 pollock in the vicinity of this frontal structure. A bioenergetic model was used to estimate age-0 pollock food consumption from field estimates of water temperature, age-0 pollock density, diet and growth. Sampling of field variables took place over three hydrographic habitats along an inshore–offshore transect located north of the islands. The bioenergetics analysis was applied for a 2-week period during the late summer of four consecutive years, 1994–1997. Model results of age-0 pollock food consumption indicated variable levels of food depletion, changing with prey type, year and habitat. The foraging impact of age-0 pollock on copepods and euphausiids (most common prey) ranged from about 3% to 77% of the biomass available at the start of the simulation. Copepod depletion was typically greater than euphausiid depletion. Consequently, juvenile pollock <60 mm in standard length were more likely to experience food limitation due to the greater proportion of copepods in their diet. We present evidence of severe foraging impact during 1996, when one of the primary prey items of juvenile pollock (i.e. large copepods) was scarcely represented both in their diet and in the water column. In all years, most instances of prey depletion were found at the inshore and front habitats; age-0 pollock densities were too low relative to their prey to severely impact the offshore zooplankton populations. We discuss these results with respect to modeling assumptions and in the context of previously acquired knowledge of fish behavior around frontal regions." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f398ad3470953345aec51fab7a4a5310> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract BackgroundHumpback whales Megaptera novaeangliae are cosmopolitan and highly migratory animals that rarely feed in low latitude waters during their breeding seasons. The western South Atlantic humpback whale population breeds off the Brazilian coast, from Natal (4°S) to Cabo Frio (23°S) and migration to their feeding grounds is known to be undertaken through offshore waters. ResultsHere we report on an unusual stranding of a young humpback whale that was feeding in the coastal waters of Santa Catarina state (27°S), in October 2014. Evidence of a ship strike and that the animal had fed in no more than a few hours before death are also presented. Additionally, it is the first time that Peisos petrunkevitchi, a sergestid shrimp species, is described as prey for large whales. ConclusionsAlthough more information is required before we can further discuss whether the area could provide an important source of food for young humpback whales, the present ship strike highlights a possibly important threat in case this ecological feature is confirmed in the future." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/04607cb72bc7df1c949e6641a8155404> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract  The evolution of calcareous dinoflagellate communities has been investigated for the latest Cretaceous to earliest Neogene interval of the mid-latitude South Atlantic. In doing so, the response of calcareous dinoflagellates to Cenozoic climatic change has been addressed for the first time. Trends in species composition and distribution patterns of wall types indicate significant changes which correlate with major palaeoenvironmental modifications. A first major shift concerning the relative abundance of species and wall types occurred across the Cretaceous–Tertiary boundary. The associations remained stable during the entire Paleocene and Eocene. Only in the late Eocene did a dramatic decrease in temperature cause a slight diversification. A second major shift in the abundance patterns occurred across the Eocene–Oligocene boundary. The early Miocene warming is possibly reflected in the distinct increase in relative abundance of one species. The assemblages of calcareous dinoflagellates evidently react to major climatic changes during the Cenozoic. These poorly investigated organisms may thus provide an important contribution to the understanding of earth's palaeoclimatic evolution." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2cbeb920ee6a52fdcd000284a4fc338b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract In recent years, a growing body of evidence has emerged indicating that the relationship between flowering phenology and climate may differ throughout various portions of the growing season. These differences have resulted in long-term changes in flowering synchrony that may alter the quantity and diversity of pollinator attention to many species, as well as altering food availability to pollenivorous and nectarivorous animal species. However, long-term multi-season records of past flowering timing have primarily focused on temperate environments. In contrast, changes in flowering phenology within humid subtropical environments such as the southeastern USA remain poorly documented. This research uses herbarium-based methods to examine changes in flowering time across 19,328 samples of spring-, summer-, and autumn-flowering plants in the southeastern USA from the years 1951 to 2009. In this study, species that flower near the onset of the growing season were found to advance under increasing mean March temperatures (−3.391 days/°C, p = 0.022). No long-term advances in early spring flowering or spring temperature were detected during this period, corroborating previous phenological assessments for the southeastern USA. However, late spring through mid-summer flowering exhibited delays in response to higher February temperatures (over 0.1.85 days/°C, p ≤ 0.041 in all cases). Thus, it appears that flowering synchrony may undergo significant restructuring in response to warming spring temperatures, even in humid subtropical environments." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e3ecbf3114be131a59c767566e7a1096> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The Delaware Bay contains the world’s largest population of horseshoe crabs, which constitute an ecologically significant component of this estuarine ecosystem. The North Atlantic speciesLimulus polyphemus has an extensive geographical distribution, ranging from New England to the Gulf of Mexico. Recent assessments of the Delaware Bay population based on beach spawning and trawling data have suggested a considerable decrease in the number of adult animals since 1990. Considerable debate has centered on the accuracy of these estimates and their impact on marine fisheries management planning. Compounding this problem is the lack of information concerning the genetic structure of Atlantic horseshoe crab populations. This study assessed patterns of genetic variation within and between the horseshoe crab populations of Delaware Bay and Chesapeake Bay, using both Random Amplification of Polymorphic DNA (RAPD) and DNA sequence analysis of the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase I gene (COI). We examined 41 animals from Delaware Bay and 14 animals from the eastern shore of Chesapeake Bay. To provide high quality, uncontaminated genomic DNA for RAPD analysis, DNA was isolated from hemocytes by direct cardiac puncture, purified by spin column chromatography, and quantified by agarose gel electrophoresis. RAPD fingerprints revealed a relative paucity of polymorphic fragments, with generally homogeneous banding patterns both within and between populations. DNA sequence analysis of 515 bases of the 5′ portion of the mitochondrial COI gene showed haplotype diversity in the Chesapeake Bay sample to be significantly higher than in the Delaware Bay sample, despite the larger size of the latter. Haplotype analysis indicates minimal contemporary gene flow between Delaware Bay and Chesapeake Bay crab populations, and further suggests that the Delaware Bay population is recovering from a recent population decline." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/5572550de36594cfd5e364faafe59ae4> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract 44 isolated ancient woods (9,3–8579 ha) in southeastern Lower Saxony (northwestern Germany), where the Tertiary hilly country meets the Pleistocene plain, were investigated. Complete lists of 273 vascular plant species showing a more or less strong preference for woodlands were made for each wood including all the species of the groups Querco-Fagetea, Trifolio-Geranietea, Galio-Calystegietalia (selection of species) and Epilobietea. The majority of character species of woods show either a low or a high frequency, whereas fewer ones have medium frequencies. Most of the rarer species have their main occurrence in the larger woods. The number of species of all of the four groups increases with area of the wood and the correlation between the number of species and the log of area is related by a highly significant linear regression. Comparison of a single wood with two smaller woods of the same total area reveals that the two smaller woods on average have the greater number of wood species. Considering this and the fact that the rarer species have their main occurrence in the larger woods, when discussing questions of nature conservation a simple comparison of number of species and area is problematical." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/02ffc0391bdb2df134bbef37cf8712f4> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Serial sections of the vestibular ampullae of two species of fish and one species of frog were investigated by electron microscopy. The kinocilium is the only connection between the sensory cells and the auxiliary structure (cupula). The cupula possesses canals that traverse its entire height. Each canal contains a single kinocilium in its proximal part; distally, it is filled with material that stains with colloidal silver. The matrix of the cupula consists of filaments running perpendicular to the canals. These filaments do not stain with colloidal silver. The kinocilium is connected to the wall of the canal via structures that differ in the studied species of fish and frog. The filamentous links between the kinocilium and the longest stereovilli of the sensory hair bundle are similar in all the investigated species. The stereovilli are interconnected by basal and shaft links, and by horizontal and oblique tip connectors, similar to those described by other authors for macula organs and the organ of Corti, although differences in structural details, especially of the horizontal tip and the shaft connectors, are present. Some of these are species specific and some are related to the position of the sensory cell in the epithelium and/or specific to the organ (ampulla or macula organ). Some attachment sites of the links are associated with osmiophilic submembranous material. These differences in the structure, distribution and attachment sites of the links are possibly of functional importance." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/28a0f9804b181cac36995aa803200514> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Predation on four species of triclads was investigated by exposing them to likely predators in the laboratory. The only serious littoral predators would seem to be dragonfly nymphs and adult Dytiscus marginalis. Although fish devoured triclads to some extent it is argued that predation by these in nature is unlikely. The slow movement and distastefulness of triclads contribute to their protection." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8625c57c9626ac6997acd466582de89a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract An analysis is presented for a model of a two-species predator-prey system where each species can be harvested or stocked. Using methods from bifurcation theory the qualitative nature of the steady-state solutions is examined. The effect of harvesting and stocking rates and the prey carrying capacity is examined in detail." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/8c4c2d81974a84642b317c1394b06c56> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract We assessed soil fungal diversity in the dry deciduous forest of a Bhadra Wildlife Sanctuary of the Western Ghats (210.31 m a.s.l.; N 13°44′ and E75°37′). Soil samples were collected by random mixed sampling during winter (November, 2008), summer (March, 2009) and monsoon (August, 2009) seasons, and physico-chemical parameters were recorded. During winter, summer, and monsoon seasons, 49, 45 and 49 of fungal species belongs to 20, 18 and 19 of genera were isolated, respectively. Isolated soil fungi were mainly of the Mitosporic fungi, followed by Zygomycotina, Ascomycotina, Oomycotina and Coelomycetes. Indices of diversity, dominance and fisher alpha during winter, summer and monsoon seasons were 3.756, 3.638 and 3.738 (H′), 0.9737, 0.9694 and 0.9726 (1-D) and 18.84, 29.83 and 19.46 (α), respectively. Spearman’s (r) correlation coefficient of fungal population with physico-chemical parameters of soils showed significantly positive and negative correlations (p<0.01) during winter, summer and monsoon seasons. Physico-chemical soil parameters played an important role in the occurrence, diversity, distribution, and relative abundance of fungal species in the tropical dry deciduous forest soil." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/42cb58fa38954cc5806d3d984f480595> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The dependence of laser beam induced current (LBIC) on the junction structure of $$\\text {n}^{+}$$ n+ -on-p HgCdTe photodiode has been numerically investigated. The calculated LBIC profiles varying with the junction depth are in good agreement with the experimental results (Musca et al. in J Electron Mater 28:603–610, 1999). It is found that there is a linear relationship between the magnitude of LBIC peak and the size of junction, such as depth and length. In addition, the LBIC shape between two peaks becomes more flat with increasing the junction depth. A competition mechanism of lateral and vertical current flow is proposed to explain the junction size dependence of the LBIC signal. The results help us to better understand the induced current flowing in photodiodes with different junction structures." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2c0047d418cbdf78bac4860a2edef949> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Analysis of stomach contents of samples of clupeid fishes (Japanese anchovy, half-fin anchovy, zunas' scaled sardine, rednosed glassnose and tapertail anchovy) collected from the catches of a 1982–1984 fishery resource survey showed they are zooplanktonivorous. Similar food groups, such as copepoda. Chaetognatha, Amphipoda and Mysidacea were found in the stomach. Dietary similarity coefficients were studied to evaluate the degree of similarity in the dietary species-pairs. Seasonal variation is discussed." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/da2a9ea4c30e4dd333105a9b10e500c3> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract In 1990 and 1991, a zooplankton sampling program revealed the presence of the hydromedusan Clytia hemisphaerica (Hydromedusa: Leptomedusa) from early May through late September throughout Southampton Water. The most notable aspects of the population dynamics of C. hemisphaerica in Southampton Water were the considerable interannual variation in peak abundance—10.65 m−3 in 1990 and 2.44 m−3 in 1991—and temporal patterns of mean bell diameter. The suggestion of almost continuous reproduction in 1990, as indicated by high abundance and large size range on each sampling date, is in contrast to 1991, where at the Cracknore site, five cohorts were produced at 21 d to 80 d intervals. The maximum bell diameter attained in each generation was typically 10–11 mm. At the Cracknore site in 1991, in situ bell diameter growth was linear within each cohort. A trend of increased growth rate with each subsequent cohort, from 26 μg DW d−1 to 106 μg DW d−1 was coincident with increasing water temperature. Annual production ranged from 0.98 mg C m−3 yr−1 to 1.08 mg C m−3 yr−1 in 1990 and 0.35 mg C m−3 yr −1 to 0.48 mg C m−3 yr−1 in 1991. Daily P: B ratios varied in each cohort from 0.05 to 0.35." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/506dd5af12afb79bc9c72d2845fa291f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Time along with space is one of the two fundamental dimensions of life. Whereas spatial aspects have been considered in experiments with marine mammals, research has so far not focused on timing per se although it is most likely involved in many behaviours such as foraging or navigation. This study investigated whether harbour seals possess a sense of time and how precisely they are able to discriminate time intervals. Experiments took place in a chamber that allowed keeping ambient illumination constant at 40 lx. The animal was presented with a white circle on a black background on a monitor displayed for a preset time interval. In a two-alternative forced-choice experiment, the animal had to indicate the presence of the standard or a longer comparison time interval by moving its head to one out of two response targets. Time difference thresholds were assessed for various standard intervals between 3 to 30 s adopting a staircase procedure. The experimental animal found access to the task easily and discriminated time intervals with difference thresholds partly in the millisecond range. Thus our study revealed a well-developed sense of time in a pinniped species. Time, besides information provided by the classical senses, is thus most likely an important parameter seals can rely on for various tasks including navigation and foraging." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e803d0f3d794fef02d611e1523a57c6d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Defoliation by herbivores can reduce carbon assimilation, change plant water relations, and even shift the biotic structure of plant communities. In this study, we took advantage of a long-term deer exclosure experiment to examine the consequences of persistent deer herbivory on plant water relations and the xylem structure–function relationships in Ceanothus rigidus, a maritime chaparral shrub in coastal California. Browsed plants had thicker stems with many intertwined short distal twigs, and significantly higher sapwood-to-leaf area ratios than their non-browsed counterparts. Leaf area-specific hydraulic conductivity was similar in both browsed and non-browsed plants, but xylem area-specific conductivity was significantly lower in the browsed plants. Vessel diameters were equivalent in both plant groups, but the number of vessels on a transverse area basis was nearly 40 % lower in the browsed plants, accounting for their lower transport efficiency. Mid-day in situ water potentials and losses of hydraulic conductivity due to embolism were similar in both groups of plants but stomatal conductance was higher in the browsed shrubs in the early part of the growing season. We discuss our findings in the context of whole-plant ecophysiology, and explore the consequences of herbivory on hormonal signals, wood anatomy, and xylem function." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f5e869857a7458651b5c06bc09e5e6c8> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract This paper examines aspects of job satisfaction among small-scale fishers in Guinea-Bissau, West Africa. The willingness of fishers to change métier or occupation is a central aspect of study, and gains relevance from the global degradation of marine environments. The author concludes that small-scale fishers are generally satisfied with the extent to which their and needs of self-realization and social life are met. They also express satisfaction with the state of the natural environment. However, fishers are less pleased with the fulfillment of basic needs and with the performance of fisheries managers." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/48af6cf70c6c2156bdf71f1f72db7993> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Abstract  The biology of two important lepidopterous pests, Prays oleae Bernard and Palpita unionalis Hübner, was studied. The target pests were reared on olive plants, Oleae europaea L. (Oleaceae) under laboratory conditions for two successive generations, from March to June 2002. For P. oleae, the duration of larval stage development in the first generation was 21.4 ± 0.18 days at 19.3–20.9 °C, 65–68 % R.H, while in the second generation it was 14.8 ± 0.10 days at 20.8–24.2 °C, 65–69 % R.H. The number of eggs laid per female ranged from 58 to 109 eggs in the first generation, and from 47 to 113 in the second. The larval stage duration of P. unionalis was 16.3 ± 0.12 days at 16.8–22.9 °C, 65–69 % R.H. and 15.5 ± 0.12 days at 21.6–25.5 °C, 66–69 % R.H. for the first and second generations, respectively. Also, the number of eggs laid per female ranged from 630 to 653 eggs, and from 425 to 493 eggs in the second generation under the same previous laboratory conditions. P. oleae laid eggs at night mostly singly on flower-buds, more on the calyx. than on the petals. The larvae mined on leaves and damaged groups of flowers. P. unionalis adults were active at night, laid eggs singly at twilight usually on the lower surface of foliage. Larvae fed on leaves spinning several leaves together to form shelter for the pupa." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/bb95c4a1d70ae3e6a8981876eb4d908f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Oplegnathus fasciatus (rock bream) is a commercial rocky reef fish species in East Asia that has been considered for aquaculture. We estimated the population genetic diversity and population structure of the species along the coastal waters of China using fluorescent-amplified fragment length polymorphisms technology. Using 53 individuals from three populations and four pairs of selective primers, we amplified 1 264 bands, 98.73% of which were polymorphic. The Zhoushan population showed the highest Nei’s genetic diversity and Shannon genetic diversity. The results of analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA) showed that 59.55% of genetic variation existed among populations and 40.45% occurred within populations, which indicated that a significant population genetic structure existed in the species. The pairwise fixation index F st ranged from 0.20 to 0.63 and were significant after sequential Bonferroni correction. The topology of an unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean tree showed two significant genealogical branches corresponding to the sampling locations of North and South China. The AMOVA and STRUCTURE analyses suggested that the O. fasciatus populations examined should comprise two stocks." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/da6fceeaf58dba001ac7a5f5905a5afe> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Distribution of 238U and 226Ra in soils and plants of an industrially polluted area are considered. The dependence between the biological uptake coefficients (BUCs) for the plant species studied and the radionuclide concentrations in soil can be approximated by a decreasing power function. Species differences in radionuclide uptake are demonstrated." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/af06422592cb3d2a89fdd0b699e10abc> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Micromorphology of the achene surface of 26 Brazilian species of Eleocharis was studied by scanning electron microscopy in order to evaluate its usefulness in the taxonomy of the genus. The results point out two patterns of cell organization according to silica structures of achenes. The first corresponds to a group of species (group A) that have small to medium cells arranged vertically. The second is found in those species (group B) with medium to large cells arranged horizontally. These data were useful in separating species of Eleocharis subgenus Scirpidium and E. subgenus Limnochloa (group B) from E. subgenus Eleocharis (group A). However, group A shows considerable variation in silica wall arrangement. Eleocharis squamigera, previously considered as part of E. subgenus Eleocharis, shows features rather similar to those of Scirpidium, confirming recent phylogenies. The subgenus Limnochloa was clearly distinguished from others by achenes with large cells (over 55 μm width), presence of crenate or repand anticlinal walls, and some orifices near the wall in some species. The silica wall ornamentation seems to be a useful morphological tool for studying relationships between subgenera and distinguishes Limnochloa from the other subgenera." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/33c3ef178e217ffa643e451a5f556eda> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary This paper studies the delay equation x k+1=λx k+F(x k−β), which has been employed as a model of baleen whale population dynamics. The two main questions discussed are (a) stability of equilibria, and (b) optimal exploitation policies." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/063a3d159ecdcec8f4ffd1bfa5476ad2> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract BackgroundWaterfowl can exploit distant ephemeral wetlands in arid environments and provide valuable insights into the response of birds to rapid environmental change, and behavioural flexibility of avian movements. Currently much of our understanding of behavioural flexibility of avian movement comes from studies of migration in seasonally predictable biomes in the northern hemisphere. We used GPS transmitters to track 20 Pacific black duck (Anas superciliosa) in arid central Australia. We exploited La Niña conditions that brought extensive flooding, so allowing a rare opportunity to investigate how weather and other environmental factors predict initiation of long distance movement toward freshly flooded habitats. We employed behavioural change point analysis to identify three phases of movement: sedentary, exploratory and long distance oriented movement. We then used random forest models to determine the ability of meteorological and remote sensed landscape variables to predict initiation of these phases. ResultsWe found that initiation of exploratory movement phases is influenced by fluctuations in local weather conditions and accumulated rainfall in the landscape. Initiation of long distance movement phases was found to be highly individualistic with minor influence from local weather conditions. ConclusionsOur study reveals how individuals utilise local conditions to respond to changes in resource distribution at broad scales. Our findings suggest that individual movement decisions of dispersive birds are informed by the integration of multiple weather cues operating at different temporal and spatial scales." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/6d3110b30fd4559a8ad6c2d248848eda> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The EPR spectrum of the spin 1/2 paramagnetic centers with a relatively slow relaxation is considered in the case when they are coupled via the Heisenberg exchange interaction to partners which have short times of the longitudinal and transverse paramagnetic relaxation. Under these conditions only the EPR line of paramagnetic centers with a relatively slow relaxation is detectable in experiment. The shape of this line is analyzed by solving numerically kinetic equations for the spin density matrix for simple model systems. Depending on a ratio between the exchange integral and the paramagnetic relaxation rates of partner spins, the EPR line shifts in opposite directions. For moderate relaxation rates, as the relaxation rates decrease, the EPR line shifts toward the gravity center of the total EPR spectrum. In the case of extremely fast relaxation, as the relaxation rates decrease, the reverse shift of the EPR line is expected, the line shifts away from the gravity center of the total EPR spectrum. This type of the non-monotonous line shift was experimentally observed for the monocrystal of [CuNd2(C4O4)4(H2O)16] · 2H2O when relaxation rates were changed by temperature variation." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a02c61ac6bd9bb38cdd2715bf4a942c2> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Although it is well established that coexisting heteromyid rodent species forage in different microhabitats, we do not yet know the basis for divergent microhabitat choice. One possibility is that seed harvest rates differ among microhabitats, and each species forages where it can extract seeds most efficiently. Microhabitats vary in several factors that could affect heteromyid foraging efficiency, including seed density, soil organic content and particle size distribution. We have explored the effect of each of these variables on harvest rates of several species feeding from petri dishes containing known densities of millet seeds embedded in soil of known particle size and density. Results indicate that the number of seeds harvested per second increases uniformly with seed density and soil density and decreases with soil particle size. Body size affects these relationships: larger animals have higher harvest rates for a given set of conditions and experience a greater relative change in harvest rate for a give change in conditions. This implies that heteromyids can be expected to exhibit species-specific microhabitat preferences while foraging in nature." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/717dd9f9bed3b7feb392135f7a66e768> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Mimosa is an important genus of legumes in arid and semi-arid ecosystems of the world, but scarce information is available about its interaction with microbial symbionts. In Mexico, there are no reports on the responsive of endemic Mimosa species to arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungal colonization. In this study, the AM association with seedlings of six endemic Mimosa species, M. adenantheroides, M. calcicola, M. lacerata, M. luisana, M. polyantha and M. texana var. filipes, is reported. Field conditions were simulated in the greenhouse. Seeds were collected from plants and soil from the localities where the species occur within the semi-arid Tehuacán–Cuicatlán Valley, Mexico. Four treatments were applied: (1) control, (2) benomyl, (3) phosphorus, and (4) benomyl plus phosphorus. Mycorrhizal seedlings of five species, M. adenantheroides, M. lacerata, M. luisana, M. polyantha and M. texana var. filipes, showed a higher shoot and total dry weight than non-mycorrhizal seedlings. The only species that did not show any difference between mycorrhizal and non-mycorrhizal seedling performance was M. calcicola. M. luisana, M. polyantha and M. texana var. filipes had a higher root/shoot ratio; in general, benomyl treatments promoted seedling biomass allocation to the root, while control, phosphorus and benomyl plus phosphorus treatments decrease root/shoot ratio. Shoot P content was significantly higher in mycorrhizal than in non-mycorrhizal plants, although no significant differences were found for M. adenantheroides in all treatments. Benomyl and benomyl plus phosphorus treatments reduced AM colonization in all the species under study. Benomyl significantly reduced the number of N2-fixing root nodules, while the phosphorus treatment generally stimulated nodulation. The species M. lacerata, M. luisana, M. polyantha and M. texana var. filipes had a high mycorrhizal dependency index indicating that plant growth was strongly increased by arbuscular mycorrhiza activity. Our results indicate that the response of all Mimosa species to mycorrhization was highly variable. To our knowledge, this is the first report about the effect of AM fungi and phosphorus on Mimosa species, which may be useful in biodiversity and soil conservation programs." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/6635957fe678c9b083b45157b1e7b5d4> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The Simple Biosphere Model (SiB2) and the 2 × 2 km resolution National Land use/Land Cover database were used to investigate the effects of Land Use/Cover Change (LUCC) on land surface energy balance and climate in Jilin Province, northeast China, from 1990 to 2005. The spatial patterns of the components of surface energy balance (i.e., net radiation (R n), latent heat (LH), sensible heat (SH), and albedo (α)) and climate (i.e., canopy temperature (T c), diurnal temperature range (DTR)), as well as the roles of land cover type in variations of energy balance and climate, were investigated. The results showed that there were general similar trends in R n, LH, SH, and α in the LUCC process. The spatial patterns of T c and DTR also showed consistent relationships with LUCC processes. Leaf area index (LAI) and canopy conductance (g c) were found to be the key factors in controlling the spatial patterns of the components of surface energy balance and T c. Using linear correlation method, the gaps of the components of surface energy balance were well-explained by the differences of LAI and g c, and R n had a better correlation with T c and DTR, in the process of LUCC. The surface energy partitioning of R n into LH and SH could not only dampen or strengthen the temperature difference, but also change the relative size of albedo-based R n when the albedo gap was small, between land cover types." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4470f02b4845d4ff5109ca02da17b4f0> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract.  Nectarivory has evolved many times in birds: although best known in hummingbirds, sunbirds and honeyeaters, it also occurs on an opportunistic basis in a varied assortment of birds. We present a phylogenetic analysis of the distribution of nectarivory in birds. Specialised avian nectarivores are generally small, with an energetic lifestyle and high metabolic rates. Their high degree of dependence on nectar as a food source has led to convergence in morphological, physiological and behavioural adaptations. We examine the constituents of nectar which are most important to bird consumers, and how the birds deal with them in terms of physiology and behaviour. There are still unanswered questions: for example, the dichotomy between sucrose-rich nectars in hummingbird-pollinated plants and predominantly hexose-rich nectars in sunbird-pollinated plants appears to have little to do with bird physiologies and may rather reflect patterns of nectar secretion." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/eed963e4589656ba8944f3a37b6b1317> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Preadult development of necrophagous flies is commonly recognized as an accurate method for estimating the minimum postmortem interval (PMImin). However, once the PMImin exceeds the duration of preadult development, the method is less accurate. Recently, fly puparial hydrocarbons were found to significantly change with weathering time in the field, indicating their potential use for PMImin estimates. However, additional studies are required to demonstrate how the weathering varies among species. In this study, the puparia of Chrysomya rufifacies were placed in the field to experience natural weathering to characterize hydrocarbon composition change over time. We found that weathering of the puparial hydrocarbons was regular and highly predictable in the field. For most of the hydrocarbons, the abundance decreased significantly and could be modeled using a modified exponent function. In addition, the weathering rate was significantly correlated with the hydrocarbon classes. The weathering rate of 2-methyl alkanes was significantly lower than that of alkenes and internal methyl alkanes, and alkenes were higher than the other two classes. For mono-methyl alkanes, the rate was significantly and positively associated with carbon chain length and branch position. These results indicate that puparial hydrocarbon weathering is highly predictable and can be used for estimating long-term PMImin." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/56671708d4afc722a19e0a4b8ca5c380> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The harvester antVeromessor andrei Mayr is a major seed predator on annual grassland growing on serpentine soil at Jasper Ridge, N. California. Ants forage intensively during morning and evening sessions in areas surrounding nests. Activity is at its most intense in early summer, coinciding with peak seed release for most annual plant species. Ants show strong preferences for seeds of non-dominant species, notablyMicroseris douglasii (DC.) Sch.-Bip., but preferences alter over the season in response to seed availability. Seeds of the dominant annual species,Lasthenia californica DC ex Lindley are not foraged until later in the summer when seeds of other species are less abundant. Seedling densities and species compositions on ant nests differ markedly from surrounding areas with species relative abundances being similar to those found on gopher mounds. An exclosure experiment in areas adjacent to nests indicated that ants significantly reduced the densities of species with preferred seeds. Ants may therefore significantly affect plant distribution and abundance within the serpentine grassland." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/dd7c3ff1d5308cb8f93777de768d62ac> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The larvicidal activity of Mentha piperita, Cymbopogan citratus (lemongrass), Eucalyptus globulus and Citrus sinensis (orange) essential oils and their combinations was evaluated against Musca domestica (housefly) and Anopheles stephensi (mosquitoes) through contact toxicity assay. Among all the tested essential oils/combinations, Me. piperita was found to be the most effective larvicidal agent against Mu. domestica and An. stephensi with LC50 values of 0.66 μl/cm2 and 44.66 ppm, respectively, after 48 h. The results clearly highlighted that the addition of mentha oil to other oils (1:1 ratio) improved their larvicidal activity. The order of effectiveness of essential oils/combinations indicated that the pattern for An. stephensi follows the trend as mentha > mentha + lemongrass > lemongrass > mentha + eucalyptus > eucalyptus > mentha + orange > orange and for Mu. domestica as mentha > mentha + lemongrass > lemongrass > mentha + orange > orange > mentha + eucalyptus > eucalyptus. The images obtained from scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis indicated the toxic effect of Me. piperita as the treated larvae were observed to be dehydrated and deformed. This study demonstrates the effectiveness of tested essential oils/combinations against the larval stages of Mu. domestica and An. stephensi and has the potential for development of botanical formulations." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9e9bed1c30b65311f1a926b1ddb184d5> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The quantitative development and uptake of radio-labelled phytodetritus in benthic macro- and meiofauna was studied in a 5-month experiment in two mesocosms, one of which received a single large nutrient (N and P) addition, while the other served as control. In reponse to the 12-fold increase in phytoplankton biomass noted after 2 weeks and the resulting enhanced accumulation of fresh phytodetritus, the abundance and biomass of the polychaetes Mediomastus ambiseta and Polydora ligni and the mud anemone Cerianthiopsis americanus increased significantly in the enriched tank. The abundances of P. ligni and M. ambiseta increased 37-fold and 12-fold, respectively, within the first two months of the experiment. No other macrofaunal or meiofaunal taxa showed any consistent positive quantitative response to the increased input of phytodetritus. In the control tank no considerable change in the benthic community structure was noted. The measurements of radio-label uptake within the benthic fauna showed that the quantitatively most successful species utilized fresh phytodetritus highly. However, a high degree of utilization of fresh detritus was also shown by taxa that did not respond quantitatively within the 5 month of the experiment, and almost all taxa showed a preference for fresh detritus over older organic material. Within the benthic meiofauna, kinorhynchs and especially foraminiferans showed a remarkably low preference for fresh detritus. A budget calculation comparing the total amounts of labelled organic carbon bound in animal tissue and in the sediment indicated that at any time at least 75% of this carbon was available for assimilation by deposit feeders. These results suggest that factors other than the availability of food, such as competition for space by a few opportunistic macrofauna species, limited the response of other species within this benthic community to the increased input of phytodetritus." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/137b55d40ab1b21061ba620145b3650a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Breeding ecology and mating patterns of the western toad, Bufo boreas, were examined in three large explosively breeding populations in the Oregon Cascade Mountains. Two mating patterns occurred variably within and among the three populations. First, a large male mating advantage was observed in two of the three populations when data from all the days of data collection were combined. When each day of breeding was analyzed separately, there was a large male mating advantage on 3 of 5 days at one population, and mating was random on all days at the two other populations. The second mating pattern, positive assortative mating by size, was observed at two of the three populations. This pattern was found on separate days of breeding as well as when data from all days were combined at one population, and on only one day of breeding at the second population. In a survey of anuran amphibian mating patterns, intraspecific variation was found in 13 of 15 species, including the present study of the western toad. Intrapopulation variation in mating patterns among breeding years has been observed in 5 of 8 anurans, whereas within-site, within-year mating pattern variation has only been reported for the western toad. These results strongly suggest that anuran mating patterns are frequently neither species-specific nor population-specific attributes. Variable mating patterns were most commonly observed in explosively-breeding anurans. Explosive breeders may be susceptible to variable mating patterns because they may be more sensitive to fluctuations in environmental conditions, demographic parameters, and the intensities of intrasexual competition and mate choice." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b1d130c74e7999893db18e7faf27a237> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The objective of the present article is to document the first stratigraphic occurrence of the colonial oculinid Madrepora, known from the modern seas as an azooxanthellate taxon that contributes to the formation of deep-water coral reefs. The Upper Cretaceous specimens of Madrepora sp. reported herein from Poland were recovered from Upper Maastrichtian (Nasiłów and Bochotnica localities) and Lower Maastrichtian (Bliżów locality) siliceous limestones. The corals are preserved as imprints of the branch fragments and molds of the calices. Despite their moldic preservation, the coral remains exhibit key generic features of the genus Madrepora; including (1) sympodial colony growth form with calices arranged in opposite and alternating rows in one plane of the branch, and (2) imprints of the granular coenosteum texture, occasionally showing peculiar reticulate patterns. Some features of the Cretaceous Madrepora sp., such as the reticulate coenosteum texture, the range of the corallite diameter (2.8–4 mm), and the arrangement of the septa in three regular cycles resemble the skeletal features of the modern, typically constructional, species M. oculata (type species). The lack of any evidence of coral buildups and related debris in the whole Upper Cretaceous/Paleogene sequences from Poland and the sparse occurrence of colony fragments, suggests that the Cretaceous Madrepora sp. formed small, isolated colonies." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b9a8f827b60c2cf22ac206fd334af35a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Plant-soil microbial interactions have moved into focus as an important mechanism for understanding plant coexistence and composition of communities. Both arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) as well as other root endophytic fungi co-occur in plant roots, and therefore have the potential to influence relative abundances of plant species in local assemblages. However, no study has experimentally examined how these key root endosymbiont groups might interact and affect plant community composition. Here, using an assemblage of five plant species in mesocosms in a fully factorial experiment, we added an assemblage of AM fungi and/or a mixture of root endophytic fungal isolates, all obtained from the same grassland field site. The results demonstrate that the AM fungi and root endophytes interact to affect plant community composition by changing relative species abundance, and consequently aboveground productivity. Our study highlights the need to explicitly consider interactions of root-inhabiting fungal groups in studies of plant assemblages." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/6b8ce5e7123872e89825e4e2e90bca5a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Data on mammalian, avian and invertebrate biomass in mixed broadleaf-podocarp forest of the Orongorongo Valley are summarised and compared with the biomass in other forests. Animal biomass totalled at least 504 kg/ha — more than twice that in several tropical forests but less than that reported from temperate deciduous forests of Europe. Earthworms (333 kg/ha) provided most animal biomass: arthropods at least 145 kg/ha, mammals (all introduced) 25 kg/ha, and birds 0.6 kg/ha. By world standards the biomass of mammals, and litter-dwelling and underground arthropods, is high and that of birds moderate. Introduced mammals have greatly altered the distribution of biomass in this forest, herbivores and predatory mammals gaining biomass at the expense of some native aboveground invertebrates and birds, several of which have been lost to this community." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d1ef86b5d340c0eb0e9932edb0c98598> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Scolopacid sandpipers were studied from 1980 until 1984 during spring migration in North Dakota. Common species foraging together in mixed-species flocks differed in bill length most often by 20 to 30 percent (ratios from 1.2:1 to 1.3:1). Observed flocks were compared to computer generated flocks drawn from three source pools of Arctic-nesting sandpipers. The source pools included 51 migrant species from a global pool, 33 migrant species from a Western Hemisphere pool, and 13 species that migrated though North Dakota. The observed flocks formed randomly from the available species that used the North Dakota migration corridor but the North Dakota species were not a random selection from the Western Hemisphere and global pools of Arctic-nesting scolopacid sandpipers. In short, the ephemeral, mixed-species foraging flocks that we observed in North Dakota were random mixes from a nonrandom pool. The size-ratio distributions were consistent with the interpretation that use of this migration corridor by sandpipers has been influenced by some form of sizerelated selection such as competition." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/fc11bed073eb9c80a9187e6245f742ef> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Both plant genotype and yearly abiotic variation affect herbivore population sizes, but long-term data have rarely been used to contrast the relative contributions of each. Using a hierarchical Bayesian model, we directly compare effects of these two factors on the population size of a common herbivore, Aceria parapopuli, on Populus angustifolia × fremontii F1 hybrid trees growing in a common garden across 8 years. Several patterns emerged. First, the Bayesian posterior estimates of tree genotype effects on mite gall number ranged from 0.0043 to 229 on a linear scale. Second, year effect sizes across 8 years of study ranged from 0.133 to 1.895. Third, in comparing the magnitudes of genotypic versus yearly variation, we found that genotypic variation was over 130 times greater than variation among years. Fourth, precipitation in the previous year negatively affected gall abundances, but was minimal compared to tree genotype effects. These findings demonstrate the relative importance of tree genotypic variation in determining herbivore population size. However, given the demonstrated sensitivity of cottonwoods to drought, the loss of individual tree genotypes from an altered climate would have catastrophic impacts on mites that are dependent upon these genotypes for their survival." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/73b0aef75b47de8111d70d68e7faa2bb> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The link between landscape properties and foraging decisions by herbivores remains unclear, but such knowledge is central to the understanding of plant–herbivore dynamics. Our goal was to determine whether fine-scale foraging paths of free-ranging elk (Cervus canadensis) respond to spatial structure of habitats in Yellowstone National Park. During winter 2002 we gathered elk-foraging information by following snow tracks in open habitats located on hillsides and flat terrain. The 21 snow paths surveyed were comprised on average of 15 discrete snow craters connected to each other by relatively straight-line movements. Our analyses revealed two levels of selection: elk chose where to dig, and how much search effort to allocate at digging sites based on habitat characteristics. On hillsides, elk preferentially dug in areas of greater biomass of grasses and forbs, and simply walked through poorer sites without digging. Individuals also searched more intensively, creating larger craters, where food biomass was higher. On flat terrain, crater size decreased with snow depth and increased with snow density. Correlated random walk models usually were adequate to characterize elk movement on flat terrain, but not on hillsides. First, as the number of movements between local foraging areas increased, elk displacements on hillsides became shorter than expected from random patterns. This trend on hillsides was strongly influenced by interindividual variation in movement behavior. Second, elk tended to forage perpendicularly to aspect, resulting in horizontal displacements. Our study demonstrates that free-ranging elk adjust their foraging to fine-scale habitat structure." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/59a6cf031dc17a0e92300168ea2714d1> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Multinomial Logit Model has analyzed the relationship between the frequency of visits to recreation areas and the motivational factors affecting the visits. Kastro Environment Preserving Site that is located in the Black Sea coast of Marmara region in Turkey, has been chosen as the site for this study. Kastro bay is a natural park that is visited only for recreational visits. The study has been conducted on a photogenic study group due to the proximity factor of Kastro bay close to Istanbul. Kastro bay is a popular recreational park due to its characteristic advantages such as a 200 m wide and approximately 2.5 km long beach and with its high quality vegetation. The vegetation type includes ash tree, oak tree, black pine, sand lily etc. Kastro bay is also the site for the Mediterranean seals (Monachus-monachus) which are at the level of extinction. Approximately 50,000 visitors visit the region during the months of July and August. It has been concluded that there is high direct correlation between the frequency of visits and the motivational factors. It has been determined that the visits are mostly based on the sea and the ecological tourism." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/299fbe43a1a0fed4adc6e2e911811337> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Herbivores can shape plant communities, especially in the Arctic. We tested the role of geese for structuring bryophyte communities at fine spatial scales in the arctic tundra by excluding them from 4 × 4 m areas. We surveyed the presence and absence of bryophyte species in quadrats (10 × 10 cm) divided into 25 cells outside and inside these exclosures, after 5 and 11 years of treatment. Species richness per cell (4 cm2) was higher in the presence of geese, especially after 11 years of treatment, while geese had little effect on richness at larger scales (i.e. quadrat and whole exclosure). The slope of the species–area relationship within quadrats was consequently shallower outside exclosures. Our results further suggest that the community outside the exclosures was more variable in space and time than that inside the exclosures. We conclude that goose foraging activity promotes the coexistence of bryophyte species at the centimetre scale." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d81877be9434f5b9330c475ec753b647> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The daily foraging patterns of seven colonies of the eastern tent caterpillar, Malacosoma americanum, were monitored photoelectronically during the last three larval stadia to provide the first detailed record of the foraging behavior of a gregarious caterpillar under field conditions. Colonies were active an average of 49.3% of each day. Three bouts of foraging, centered about 0600 h, 1500 h and 2000 h (EST), occurred daily during the fourth and fifth stadia. Although ambient temperatures were less favorable for foraging and food processing than at other times of the day, the caterpillars were most active at dusk and dawn, and spent comparatively little time away from the tent during the daylight hours. In the last (sixth) stadium, the caterpillars foraged only under the cover of darkness. A lack of relationship between the rate at which the caterpillars processed food and the spacing of their feeding bouts, indicates that this species follows a schedule of feeding and growth shaped by factors other than those directly related to feeding efficiency and ambient temperature. Colony foraging patterns may reduce caterpillar mortality by minimizing contact between larvae and day-active predators and parasitiods." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/dab0967dcc6cb7a15aeda0b2f0c09533> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract For each Portuguese fleet component, landings of biogeographic groups of fish species were compared for the period of 1993–2009. Wide-distribution species were the most abundant in landings, but have shown a decreasing trend. Temperate species had higher landings in trawl fisheries, whereas subtropical species were most abundant and exhibiting an increasing trend in landings of multi-gear fisheries. A latitudinal gradient was observed, with landings of temperate species being more important in the North-western coast than in the South-western and South coasts. Although trawl fisheries were relatively more important in the North-western coast, there has been a recent increase in the relative importance of multi-gear fisheries and of subtropical species in this area. The increasing relative importance of subtropical species in Portuguese fisheries along with the fact that landings of subtropical species were higher in multi-gear fisheries could indicate an easier adaptation of Portuguese multi-gear fisheries to the effects of climate change. However, as multi-gear fisheries include a wide range of gears, techniques and target-species, they may not all respond in the same manner to changes in fish species’ distribution. Among multi-gear fisheries, trammel nets catch a wider variety of species and a wider size range than gill nets or longlines; thus, trammel net fishers can adapt to changes in abundance of the main target species more readily than those using more species- and size-specific gears. Therefore, trammel net fisheries could more easily adapt to the effects of climate change on fish distribution than gill net or longline fisheries." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2dd2382580542226154a3b64c3b4dde7> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Climate plays a fundamental role in limiting the range of a species, is a key factor in the dynamics of large herbivores, and is thought to be involved in declines of moose populations in recent decades. We examined effects of climate and growing-season phenology on recruitment (8–9 months old) of young Shiras moose (Alces alces shirasi) over three decades, from 18 herds, across a large geographic area encompassing much of the southern extent of their range. Recruitment declined in 8 of 18 herds during 1980–2009, whereas others did not exhibit a temporal trend (none showed a positive trend). During those three decades, seasonal temperatures increased, spring–summer precipitation decreased, and spring occurred earlier, became shorter in duration, and green-up occurred faster. Recruitment was influenced negatively by warm temperatures during the year before young were born, but only for herds with declining recruitment. Dry spring–summers of the previous year and rapid rates of spring green-up in the year of birth had similar negative influences across declining and stable herds. Those patterns indicate both direct (year t ) and delayed (year t−1) effects of weather and plant phenology on recruitment of young, which we hypothesize was mediated through effects on maternal nutritional condition. Suppressed nutrition could have been induced by (1) increased thermoregulatory costs associated with warming temperatures and (2) shortened duration of availability of high-quality forage in spring. Progressive reductions in net energetic gain for species that are sensitive to climate may continue to hamper individual fitness and population dynamics." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/725e01068ab240c62588a3e86e17de22> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Canopy gaps are important as entry points for new genotypes and new species into many types of vegetation, yet little is known about them in any type of vegetation but forests. Forest gaps are too large for manipulative experiments to be readily undertaken, and hitherto grassland gaps have been too small to be easily mapped. Preliminary results from mapping small (>1 cm) grassland gaps with a new fibre-optic device suggest that experiments need to be performed at a smaller physical scale than has hitherto been achieved." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d9afe4deff31a6fece5819d88667e9d9> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Minimal feeding competition among female mountain gorillas (Gorilla gorilla beringei) has resulted in egalitarian social relationships with poorly defined agonistic dominance hierarchies. Thus, gorillas are generally viewed as non-competitive egalitarian folivores that have had little need to develop effective competitive strategies to access food resources. However, this generalization is inconsistent with more recent research indicating that most gorillas are frugivorous, feeding on patchily distributed food resources. The current study at Howletts Wild Animal Park, Kent, England, explores the effects of clumped and defendable foods on female gorilla agonistic relationships among three groups of western lowland gorillas (G. g. gorilla), conditions that are predicted to lead to well-differentiated agonistic dominance hierarchies among female primates. The Howletts gorillas foraged all day on low-energy/-nutrient, high-fiber foods widely distributed around their enclosure by the keepers. However, they also had periodic access to high-energy foods (e.g., nuts, raisins, strawberries, etc.) that the keepers would spread in a clumped and defendable patch. Frequencies of agonistic and submissive behaviors between females and proximity data were gathered. High-status females were found to monopolize the food patch and kept the low-status females at bay with cough-grunt threat vocalizations or by chasing them away. Agonistic interactions were initiated mostly by females of high status; these were directed towards females of low status and were generally not reciprocal. In addition, females of low status engaged in submissive behaviors the most often, which they directed primarily at females of high status, especially in response to aggression by the latter. Agonistic interactions between high- and low-status females had decided outcomes more often than not, with low-status females the losers. Competition over highly desirable foods distributed in defendable clumps at Howletts appears to have led to well-defined dominance relationships among these female gorillas." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a9818f456cc5199288d29aff261a9781> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Adult females of the mantis Tenodera angustipennis were presented with the \"nonlocomotive\" prey model, a static rectangle with two lines oscillating regularly at its sides, generated on a computer display. The models were varied in rectangle luminance (black, gray, and light gray), rectangle height (0.72, 3.6, and 18 mm), rectangle width (0.72, 3.6, and 18 mm), and angular velocity of oscillating lines (65°, 260°, and 1040°/s) to examine their effects on prey recognition. Before striking the model, the mantis sometimes showed peering movements that involved swaying its body from side to side. The black model of medium size (both height and width) elicited higher rates of fixation, peering, and strike responses than the large, small, or gray model. The model of medium angular velocity elicited a higher strike rate than that of large or small angular velocity, but angular velocity had little effect on fixation and peering. We conclude that mantises respond to a rectangle in deciding whether to fixate, and to both rectangle and lines in deciding whether to strike after fixation." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9447e2da92e3860be84056a2a3f2a9f0> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Pea aphids show intraclonal variability in antipredator behaviour. Among the offspring of a single parthenogenetically reproducing female, some individuals drop from the plant in response to alarm pheromone while others remain on the plant. We demonstrate that this intraclonal behavioural variability can be altered by selection. The proportion of aphids dropping in response to alarm pheromone was significantly greater in lines in which this behaviour was selected than in clonally identical lines in which the opposite phenotype was favoured. This change occurred within one generation and could not be attributed to grand-maternal effects, nor to environmental effects. These results demonstrate the ability of clonal aphids to adapt to changes in the environment within a single generation." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/c8416497f1a5bc501ee8273206f3faf0> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract A modern approach to the search for biologically active substances of potential therapeutic use isolated from marine organisms is illustrated by a presentation of the multidisciplinary project pursued by the Roche Research Institute of Marine Pharmacology near Sydney, Australia. This specialized insitute is part of the world-wide research endeavour of our company and has now been in operation for five years. Following a brief outline of the technical functions the main scientific achievements published by the scientists of the institute are reviewed. This institute is, to our knowledge, the only one of its kind in private industry and we have attempted to demonstrate how its activities should be viewed in the overall context of today's drug or product development." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/fe26c6712d901e2234ad31a2682a7652> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Pollen morphology of ten Brazilian species within the South American clade (ca. 20 species) of Symplocos section Barberina (Symplocaceae) was analyzed with scanning electron microscopy to assess their reported androdioecious breeding system. All species exhibited pollen dimorphism. Pollen from male individuals is well developed and 3-colporate, whereas that from morphologically hermaphroditic individuals is malformed, often completely fragmented, lacks cytoplasm, and has no germination pores. Our results suggest that the morphologically hermaphroditic species of S. section Barberina with malformed pollen are cryptically dioecious." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/bef8112a37add7c65f3cdef7fdd5cf49> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract This study aimed to investigate the sinigrin content and antioxidant properties of Dolsan mustard seeds (DMS) and Dolsan leaf mustard (DLM) extracted with 50% acetonitrile. The extracted substances were fractionated by HPLC using a preparative ODS column and then applied to measure sinigirn, total polyphenol (TP), and total flavonoid (TF) contents and antioxidant activities using 2,2-azino-bis(3-ethyl-benzothizoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS), electron donating ability (EDA), and ferric reducing antioxidant power (FRAP) assays. The contents of sinigrin (53.77 mg/g), TP (404.33 mg gallic acid equivalents/g extract), TF (395.33 mg quercetin equivalents/g extract) were higher content in DMS than in DLM. Antioxidant activities of DMS were a slightly higher than DLM. ABTS, EDA, and FRAP assays showed that there was a linear correlation between TP and TF contents and antioxidant capacity. These results suggested that the antioxidant effects of DMS and DLM might be mediated through the TP and TF contents, providing potential source of natural antioxidants." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/6564bfa6fb4ae05ab62ee74869199dd0> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The availability of food, and hence energy, is known to influence the abundance, habitat choice and growth of individuals. In contrast, there is a paucity of knowledge on how the interaction of energy supply and social status determines patterns of residency and movement. This study tests whether the presence of conspecifics and an individual’s social status in relation to food supply influence the fitness and movement of a drift-feeding fish (Galaxias fasciatus). Using an information-theoretic approach (AIC), our analysis indicated that the most parsimonious model of fish movement among pools was one that included food supply, social rank and fish relative growth rate. Our results indicated that subordinate fish relocated more frequently compared to dominant fish, most likely as a consequence of intra-specific competition that limited the access of these smaller fish to resources and constrained their growth. Our results suggest that energy constraints may force individuals to explore new habitats in an effort to find more energetically profitable patches. We conclude that intra-specific competition mediated through the social hierarchy amongst closely interacting individuals plays a key role in determining individual growth, residency and relocation." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a507461475e259446419fc91a8c96d63> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract We tested the idea that leaf-cutting ants preferentially use one of their mandibles in the leading position when cutting leaves. We recorded the mandible position of both paint-marked and unmarked foragers from a laboratory colony of Acromyrmex echinatior during foraging bouts in two experiments 1 year apart (2012 and 2013). Both types of ants were ambidextrous in 2012, and so were unmarked ants in 2013. In contrast, marked ants in 2013 had a preference for leading with their right mandible. The individual laterality of these latter ants ranged from ambidexterity to about 70 % use of the preferred leading mandible. In 2013, we also estimated the cutting rate (length cut per second spent cutting) and harvesting rate (leaf area harvested per second spent cutting) of cutting events for marked foragers. Despite significant positive correlations between head size and both cutting and harvesting rates, the intensity of lateralization was better explained by cutting and harvesting rates than by head size. Specifically, the most lateralized foragers were the slowest and harvested the smallest leaf area per second. We interpret this association as evidence that lateralization was stronger for ants for which cutting was more challenging." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/12c1b10b38216d90bda2bb3b93efc331> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The sharpsnout seabream (Diplodus puntazzo, Cetti 1777) is a species rarely found in coastal areas of Sicily, but is important in Mediterranean aquaculture. In order to detect the number of meristic characters and the main types of body deformation, 588 specimens of sharpsnout seabream were collected from a coastal zone of south-east Sicily (Licata, AG—Italy). Different sized classes were examined and the relationship between size and the number of meristic characters (number of fin rays) was found. The number of vertebrae, anal fin hard rays and dorsal fin hard rays was constant and did not vary with size. Seventeen types of skeletal and fin anomalies were observed, but no grave anomalies were found, such as the absence of a swimbladder, lordosis, kyphosis and calculi in the terminal tract of the urinary duct. The most prevalent anomalies were associated with the fins, especially E7 (pectoral fin rays), F7 (anal fin rays) and I7 (dorsal fin soft rays). There was no correlation between frequency of anomaly and size class. The malformation index was 4.54." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/74548f135a3dd7e74398a92183d383b2> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Data on the occurrence of species with fleshy diaspores and on breeding birds were collected in three abandoned orchards, resp. 8, 11 and 24 years after abandonment. Most of the 41 phanerophytes and vines with fleshy diaspores are also found in the borders of the orchards, the more so if the number of years since abandonment increases. Most species have small seeds and red or black coloured diaspores, most of which ripen in autumn. The frequent species show a characteristic distribution pattern in relation to the distance of the fruit trees: high densities near the trunk and uniform decrease with distance. This is explained by the behaviour of frugivorous birds. No correlation was found between distribution patterns and soil conditions. Age structure of colonizing species shows a distribution conforming an inversed J curve in the more recently abandoned orchard. The main conclusions are:1.Pioncor trees are attractive for frugivorous birds and may act as nuclei. This supports the facilitation model.2.The distribution of diaspores by birds helps to homogenize the species distribution on the regional level but at the site level individual differences in nucleation cause a heterogeneity." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/708dcd411cc3031fa20e19830f4c4050> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary A comparison of rectal morphology and ultrastructure is made between a freshwater (A. aegypti) and salt water (A. campestris) species of mosquito larvae, and between A. campestris larvae producing hyper- and hyposmotic urine. The epithelium of A. aegypti contains one cell type characterized by infolding of both the apical and basal membranes, straight lateral borders, and evenly distributed mitochondria. The rectum of A. campestris contains distinct anterior and posterior regions, each made up of a single cell type. These two regions can be distinguished on the basis of cell thickness, depth of apical infolding and distribution of mitochondria. The anterior region is similar to the rectum of A. aegypti, while the posterior region is considered unique to the salt-water species and hence probably is associated with the formation of hyperosmotic urine. In A. campestris, the apical (rather than lateral or basal) membranes are probably the site of hyperosmotic urine production. Two possible mechanisms for this process are discussed." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9386b45382c2f7cefa13e376efdcdf73> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Tropical rain forests have an amazingly large number of closely related, sympatric species. How the sympatric species coexist is central to understanding the maintenance of high biodiversity in tropical rain forests. We compared local and geographical distributions among trees in Scaphium (Sterculiaceae), a tropical canopy tree genus. Scaphium is endemic to the Far Eastern tropics and comprises six species. Scaphium scaphigerum is distributed in drier regions than the other species' geographical distribution ranges. Scaphium longiflorum is distributed swamp forests, whereas the others were distributed in lowland and hill tropical rain forests on undulating land. Scaphium borneense, S. longipetiolatum, and S. macropodum co-occurred in a 52-ha plot in Lambir, Sarawak and clearly showed an allopathic pattern of distribution related to elevation in it. In the plot, the elevational difference was correlated with soil variation. Consequently, the difference in edaphic condition promoted the habitat segregation of the species. Thus these five Scaphium species have divergent habitats at various spatial scales and coexist because they reduce direct competition by habitat niche differentiation. Although the non-equilibrium hypothesis for the coexistence of Scaphium species cannot be rejected categorically due to the lack of enough information about S. linearicarpum, the equilibrium force may play the predominant role which permits their coexistence." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/1a9b10573c377f1a8f881e3fe61a11a9> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract We used an isotopic approach to investigate the intra- and interspecific differences in spatial and trophic ecology of three species of the fur seal genus Arctocephalus that inhabit distinct climatic zones: subtropical (A. australis n = 22), subantarctic (A. tropicalis n = 8), and polar (A. gazella n = 10). We obtained sequential δ 13C and δ 15N values in dentine from canine teeth of specimens found along the southern Brazilian coast. We calculated isotopic niches where axes were used as a surrogate for trophic (δ 15N) and spatial (δ 13C) dimensions of the ecological niche. Further, we adjusted generalized additive mixed models to chronological data of δ 13C and δ 15N to investigate the ontogenetic variation of the isotopic niche. The three species showed significant segregation in both spatial and the trophic dimensions as a result of foraging at different latitudes. Within A. australis, males occupied higher trophic positions than females. Furthermore, some isotopic niche overlap was found between sexes in A. tropicalis and A. gazella, though sample sizes preclude conclusive interpretation. Marked ontogenetic variation in the isotopic niche, especially in the early years, was observed in all species. Isotopic niche suggest that intra- and interspecific competition in these otariids is minimized by different degrees of spatial and trophic segregation." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9055e8f4ad711a89c980e2cb66e10ca4> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract While the biophysics of anemophilous pollen dispersal is understood in principle, empirical studies for testing such principles are rare, particularly in native ecosystems. This paper describes mechanisms underlying the dispersal of Artemisia pollen in a Wyoming sagebrush steppe. The relationships between meteorological variables and pollen flux were defined during the 1999 Artemisia flowering season, and detailed processes at the individual plant level were experimentally tested in the field in 2000. Results indicated that Artemisia pollen presentation is continuous but with early morning maxima. Atmospheric pollen concentrations and potential dispersal rates are controlled at diurnal time scales by individual flower development together with characteristic changes in temperature/humidity and wind speeds, at multi-day scales by frontal weather patterns, and at week-long scales by flowering phenology." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d397d662b8afa2a9bbb77882935fc86c> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Positive feedbacks influenced by direct and indirect interactions between fire, vegetation, and microclimate can allow pyrophilic and pyrophobic ecosystems to co-occur in the same landscape, resulting in the juxtaposition of flammable and non-flammable vegetation. To quantify the drivers of these feedbacks, we combined measurements of vegetation, fuels, and microclimate with observations of fire spread along ecotonal gradients. We established 113 permanent transects (consisting of 532 plots), each traversing an ecotone between savanna and wetland in the Sandhills of North Carolina, USA. In each plot, we recorded cover of ten plant functional types. We collected surface fuels at a subset of our transects. We continuously monitored microclimate (nine meteorological variables) across 21 representative ecotones. Following prescribed fire, we measured fire spread along each transect. Vegetation structure and microclimate significantly predicted fire spread along the savanna-wetland ecotone. Fire spread was most influenced by vegetation structure, specifically C4 grass cover, which accounted for 67 % of the variance explained by our model. We have identified the components of the fire, vegetation, and microclimate feedback that control where fires stop under current conditions, but their control should not be considered absolute. For example, when ignited in savanna, prescribed burns continued through wetland vegetation 43 % of the time. The feedback operating within these systems may be relatively weak as compared to other savanna systems. Environmental changes may alter fire spread extent, and with it ecosystem boundaries, or even ecosystem states." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e7a8529882e9db8402219629309c56d8> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The numbers of limpets on pier pilings in the intertidal zone were reduced to almost zero and increased to almost double the numbers on control pilings to determine if densities are regulated. Densities on experimental pilings returned to that of control pilings in 3 and 8 months in two experiments. Mechanisms which could explain this readjustment of densities include density dependent vertical migration, cannibalism of newly settled young and the selection of suitable substrate by larval limpets." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9d279fbd8daa080385d5f24a8667700b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Protoplasts were isolated from leaves of axenic shoot cultures of Felicia bergeriana (Kingfisher Daisy) and Brachycome iberidifolia (Swan River Daisy) and from callus cultures of Felicia. Plants were regenerated from all three sources and since both species are of ornamental value (blue flowered) the establishment of plant regeneration provides a basis for their incorporation in somatic hybridisation programmes involving important ornamentals such as Chrysanthemum." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a5482ac9371e7bf97703e3395fa22c88> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract During the voyage of the H.M.S. Beagle, Charles Darwin quickly realized that geographic isolation led to significant changes in the adaptation of local flora and fauna (Darwin 1859). Genetic isolation is one of the well-known mechanisms by which adaptation (allopatric speciation) can occur (Palumbi, Annu Rev Ecol Syst 25:547–72, 1994; Ricklefs, J Avian Biol 33:207–11, 2002; Burns et al., Evolution 56:1240–52, 2002; Hendry et al., Science 290:516–8, 2009). Evolutionary changes can also occur when landmasses converge or are “bridged.” An important and relatively recent (Pliocene Epoch) example known as the “Great American Biotic Interchange” allowed for the migration of previously isolated species into new ecological niches between North and South America (Webb 1985, Ann Mo Bot Gard 93:245–57, 2006; Kirby and MacFadden, Palaeogeogr Palaeoclimatol Palaeoecol 228:193–202, 2005). Geographic isolation (vicariance) or geographic merging (geodispersal) can occur for a variety of reasons (sea level rise, splitting of continents, mountain building). In addition, the growth of a large supercontinent (or breakup) may change the climatic zonation on the globe and form a different type of barrier for species migration. This short review paper focuses on changing paleogeography throughout the Phanerozoic and the close ties between paleogeography and the evolutionary history of life on Earth." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d634cb300a0d31a267edc68a703c49cf> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Neurohypophyses of sexually mature Acipenser güldenstädti Brandt and Acipenser stellatus Pallas maintained in hypertonic solutions were studied by means of light and electron microscopy. The fish were caught in the Ural and transferred into basins containing either freshwater (controls) or 32‰, 22‰ and 17‰ NaCl solutions respectively. The neurohypophyses of control animals kept in freshwater for two days contained a large amount of “Gomori-positive” neurosecretory material (4 arbitrary units). An abundance of neurosecretory granules of different kinds, predominantly elementary ones, was observed electron microscopically in neurosecretory fibres and terminals of these fish. A decrease in the amount of neurosecretory material was found in all experimental animals: up to 1–2 units in A. güldenstädti after 3.5–10 h in 32‰ NaCl, and up to 3.5 units in A. stellatus after 4.5–48 h in 22‰ or 17‰ NaCl. The number of neurosecretory granules decreased considerably in the fibres and terminals in all experimental series, but that of granulated, disintegrating granules and “granule-shadows” increased markedly, especially in preterminal parts of axons. An increased number of hypertrophied mitochondria, lamellar bodies, residual granules and especially “synaptic” vesicles was seen. These changes speak for an active discharge of neurohormones into the general circulation, a phenomenon well known to be characteristic of stress responses. Pathological ultrastructural changes (breakdown of terminals, extracellular wide cisternae) were visible in A. güldenstädti neurohypophyses at the end of the experiments. Also tanycytes — “narrow” ependymal cells — and pituicytes underwent noticeable changes." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a80a80f9e6b7b86f7c80ffd708751703> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The structure of the ichthyofauna in water bodies of Kaluga oblast has undergone significant rearrangements over the past 20 years. The abundance of some species has increased, while that of other species has decreased; spontaneous dispersal of some fishes is underway. Synchronous fluctuations of fish abundance (“waves of life”) take place simultaneously in the Western Dvina, Dnieper, and Volga basins. These processes differ in intensity depending on fish species and are conditioned by a number of factors, including changes in hydrological regimes of rivers, improvement of the ecological state of small rivers, and increased poaching pressure. The results of monitoring the ichthyofauna fauna of small rivers are used as an example to trace the routes of fish dispersal and discuss changes in the composition of fish communities." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/712da2568f08059442e924367c14a059> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract In India, the stability of the forest savanna boundary (ecotone) has been questioned. To investigate the possibility of vegetation change at this boundary, we used the natural difference in the stable carbon isotope ratio (13C/12C, expressed as δ13C) of C3 (forest) and C4 (savanna) plants, which is preserved in the isotopic composition of soil organic carbon. Past changes in the position of the ecotone can thus be documented by 13C/12C analysis of soil organic matter (SOM). Measurements were made on soil samples taken along a transect across the forest savanna boundary. In both ecosystems, δ13C values of SOM in upper soil layers appeared to be in equilibrium with the current plant community: SOM was near-14‰ under savanna cover, and near-28‰ under forest. By contrast, δ13C values of SOM from deep layers of soil profiles under forest cover near the ecotone, were less negative than would be expected for a C3-dominated community. These results indicate that a change in ecosystem dominance occurred recently, and that forest has invaded an area occupied previously by a C4 plant community (savanna and cultivated grassland)." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/92b14e54f4277a6a01f0b73b0233ba45> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Altered river flow has been suggested as a cause for the low recruitment of striped bass,Morone saxatilis, in the Roanoke River (North Carolina) because of its effect on the proximity of zooplankton and larval striped bass. This results in unsuccessful feeding and subsequent starvation, which was considered to be a major mortality factor. Other mortality factors, such as parasitism and copepod predation on age-0 fish, may also be regulated to some extent by changes in river flow. The relationship of cestode plerocercoids, trematode metacercaria, mussel glochidia, and cyclopoid copepod predators with age-0 fish was evaluated in the lower Roanoke River and western Albemarle Sound from plankton net collections made in 1984 to 1986 and 1988. Plerocercoid prevalence was higher under low river flow conditions than under high flow conditions in darters (Percidae; 16.7% vs. 9.2%), minnows (Cyprinidae; 28.8% vs. 4.7%), andMorone (1.9% vs. 0%). Gut analysis of the age-0 fish revealed that copepods (source of the plerocercoids) were a major diet component ofMorone and darters but not of minnows or herring (Clupeidae). Decreases in river flow were associated with increases in copepod density (Pearson r=−0.62; p=0.0001) and plerocercoid prevalence inMorone (Pearson r=−0.29; p=0.03). The low correlation value forMorone may be quite strong considering the complexity of the variables associated with prevalence. Metacercaria were found only inMorone and minnows, and prevalence and mean intensity were less than that found for plerocercoids. Mussel glochidia prevalence was less than 0.5% for all affected taxa, an order of magnitude less that that found in other studies. The low value may indicate that the mussel population in the Roanoke River is declining. Prevalence of attacks by the predatory copepodMesocyclops edax on age-0 fish was similar to that in Chesapeake Bay, and striped bass was the primary prey. Spatial and temporal proximity of copepods and fish prey may be the key factors in regulating copepod attacks. The low prevalence of parasites and copepod predators seen in this tudy would suggest that mortality from these sources may not be a major factor in age-0 recruitment in this system. Confirmation of these conclusions would require a more controlled experimental approach." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/16c1eda6930a9cb564845751d5d7330a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Cross-ecosystem movement of nutrients and biomass can have important effects on recipient systems. Emerging aquatic insects are subsidies to terrestrial ecosystems and can influence foodweb interactions in riparian systems. In a 2-year field experiment, we simulated aquatic insect deposition by adding adult midge carcasses (150 g dry mass m−2 year−1) to 1-m2 heathland plots at a site with low natural midge deposition. We established four levels of midge-addition treatments and measured stable isotopes (δ13C and δ15N) in plants and arthropods within each treatment. We used a multiple-source isotope Bayesian mixing model to estimate the terrestrial versus aquatic contribution to the diets of arthropods. Aquatic resources were incorporated into plant, detritivore, and predator biomass. Detritivorous Collembola showed the greatest difference in isotope values (+3 ‰ δ15N and +4 ‰ δ13C) between midge-addition and reference treatments. Isotope values of small spiders followed the same trend of enrichment as Collembola while other arthropods (mites and large spiders) were only enriched after 2 years of midge addition. Although predator diets did not change, they became isotopically enriched via their likely prey (Collembola). Plants also had elevated δ15N (+1 ‰) in midge-addition treatments. The time required and amount of midge-derived C and N detected varied and depended on trophic position. Midge-derived nutrients were no longer present in arthropod biomass in the year following midge addition. Aquatic insect carcasses can be rapidly incorporated into terrestrial food webs in nearshore habitats, and repeated inputs can be detected at multiple trophic levels, thus highlighting the importance of the detrital pathway for aquatic to terrestrial cross-ecosystem subsidies." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/6b87ef76fe905e3bb41d2233b6ac1a55> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary This interim report deals with investigations on key factors controlling reef growth by zoophysiologists, ecologists, paleontologists and geologists. The different levels of emphasis are the coral animal and the reef community. The main study area is the Red Sea which reaches over 20°C latitude up to the northernmost margin of the global coral reef belt. Supplementary results on microborer ecology are provided from the Bahamas. The desert enclosed Red Sea, not influenced by land runoff and only minimally by anthropogenic (urban and touristic) nutrient inputs, is predestined for a study on the principal influence of light on calcification within bathymetrical and latitudinal gradients. Hence, on the level of the zooxanthellate scleractinian animal phototrophic and heterotrophic energy supply and its bearing on calcification are being measured in different coral species—in particular inPorites sp., one of the most important reef builders. The growth of 15 zooxanthellate scleractinians in the Gulf of Aqaba correlates with the annual light cycle. This correlation is observable down to 40 m depth. Other growth promoting factors seem to have less influence on coral extension. The availability of organically enriched sediments in shallow water probably yields nutritional value, in particular for filter feeding species, thus restricting their distribution to those areas. Zooxanthellae, when isolated fromMycedium elephantotus, are different in their dependence on depth in maximum rates of photosynthesis and photosynthetic efficiency (-slope). Increasing concentrations of pigments as a function of depth could be determined. Maximum rates of photosynthesis of zooxanthellae in vivo, collected at corresponding depth, have been 4 times higher. Structural and physiological adaptations improving heterotrophic and phototrophic energy intake are highlighted. Porites sp. was the subject of annual growth studies at locations extending from Aqaba in the North over the northern and southern Egyptian coast and islands, Sanganeb Atoll and Wingate reef offshore Sudan to the Gulf of Tadjoura in the Gulf of Aden (Djibouti). Mean growth rates in the shallow water zone increase with decreasing latitude and are highest at the southernmost studied reefs in the Gulf of Tadjoura. However, the observed latitutdinal growth reduction is restricted to the upper ca. 15 m of the water column. The upper limit of growth potential decreases with depth parallel to the decrease of light availability. Highest growth rates are recorded in shallow depth (10–2.9 mm yr−1). This zone reaches at Aqaba (29°30′N) to a depth of ca. 10 m. At the southern Egyptian reefs (24°30′N) this zone extends to ca. 15 m water depth. This effect is probably a result of the stronger reduction of winter light levels and water temperature in the northern regions. Compared to other oceans the decrease of growth with increasing latitude of Red SeaPorites corals is far less, and growth rates at Aqaba are the highest observed at these latttudes. On the level of the community of reef inhabitants four principal topics are addressed: The first one is the dynamics of the proportions of hermatypic and ahermatypic organisms and open space. The occurrence of stony and soft corals and the sharing of empty space in different reef sections at Aqaba and on Sanganeb Atoll were quantified. Soft corals, mainlySinularia- and xeniid species, occupy decreasing shares with depth. Among theXenia species a bathymetrical zonation pattern was detected. The next issue is the growth impeding role of soft corals and gastropod parasites and predators on scleractinians. Experimental and field observations showed xeniid soft corals to be opportunistic i.e. occupying rapidly open space rather than to attacking and outcompeting stony corals. An increasingly specialized behaviour was detected among corallivorous gastropods of the family Coralliophilidae to exploit their coral hosts. Whereas these snails are more or less sessile and depend for a long time on the surrounding host polyps the mobileDrupella cornus (Thaididae) forms feeding aggregations which denude mainly branching corals on shallow reef parts. Furthermore, the role counteracting reef growth of macro- and microbioeroders is investigated.Diadema setosum is a major destructive agent on reefs at Aqaba (not in the central Red Sea). The grazing sea urchins do not only keep potential colonization area free but also erode carbonate material (e. g. 1468 g/m2/year, 10 m depth). Demographic and bathymetric patterns in the sea urchin population are analyzed including their bearing on bioerosion of the reef. Investigations on microboring organisms in carbonate material have started in the Red Sea; initial results, however, are only available from similar studies near Lee Stocking Island, Bahamas. Three major environments have been identified based on the distribution of the different microborers. These are1)the intertidal environment dominated by boring cyanobacteria.,2)reef sites from 2 to 30 m water depth dominated by a diverse assemblage of boring cyanobacteria and chlorophytes, and3)the deep reef slope from 100 to 300 m dominated by boring green algae and heterotrophs. The boring chlorophyte genusPhaeophila appears rapidly and dominates at sites from 2 to 30 m, but it leaves vacated borings and is replaced byOstreobium quekettii after 1 year. Different substrate types show very different rates of colonization by microborers. The greatest excavation rates (100 g/m2/3 months) occur in fine-grained limestone, while the slowest rates (0.5 g/m2/3 months) occur in calcite crystals. Molluscan shell material shows intermediate rates of excavation. Light conditions appear very important in determining the growth rate and distribution of different microborers between the sites, however, the interaction of light with other factors, such as substrate, time period of exposure, and water quality conditions may be involved." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/842ce5124e6c687e24f5acb9848df5be> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Few studies have dealt so far with the macrophytic communities inhabiting the small Mediterranean rivers in South-East France. In order to fill this gap, it was proposed to assess the effects of natural and anthropic disturbances on the biodiversity in the lowland River Huveaune (South-East France). The Mediterranean climate in this region results in strong seasonal variations in the hydrological regime: there is a long dry period and sudden episodes of flooding occur, which greatly affect the plant community dynamics. The River Huveaune is severely polluted by organic matter. Two stations were set up, one in an upstream reference sector and the other in a downstream polluted sector. The standard sampling area of 100 m2 was divided into plots 4 m2 in size, some of which included part of the river and part of a bank. In addition, plant inventories were drawn up over distances of 50 and 100 m. Seventeen sampling campaigns were carried out from April 2002 to October 2003, resulting in the first systematic list of macrophyte species occurring in small Mediterranean rivers in South-Eastern France. The great variability of the hydrological factors involved leads to considerable spatial and temporal variations in the biodiversity. The upstream station was found to be less severely disturbed and to show a wider range of macrophytes than the downstream station: bryophytes predominate upstream and phanerogams and macroalgae, downstream. The Macrophyte Biological Index for River (IBMR) was tested and found to be a valid means of water quality assessment in small Mediterranean rivers." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/065ec7a1dd028a38e2408d1528afe50a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Grazing experiments evaluated by microscopical counting were conducted with different size classes of Daphnia hyalina, D. galeata, Eudiaptomus gracilis, and Cyclops sp., all from Lake Constance, using natural lake phytoplankton as food. Species-specific grazing selectivity coefficients were calculated for the dominant phytoplankton species from weekly experiments. Specific selectivities were found to be largely invariant through the growing season. All zooplankters grazed more efficiently on phytoflagellates such as Rhodomonas and Cryptomonas than on coccales such as Chlorella and Scenedesmus, regardless of their relative abundance in the phytoplankton assemblage. Filtering rates did not decrease in the presence of filamentous algae. Certain filamentous species were grazed efficiently, but only by D. hyalina: Anabaena planktonica, Oscillatoria amphigranulata, and Stephanodiscus binderanus. Large diatom colonies like Asterionella formosa and Fragilaria crotonensis were grazed well only by Cyclops sp. Some algal species were consistently selected against: Mougeotia thylespora and Dinobryon sp. The species-specific selectivity coefficients can be used as weighting factors to assess the ‘effective food concentration’ relative to Rhodomonas minuta, a reference species for optimal food." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/6921af9dc51f4e8c88e271da1c95a693> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Differences in spatial rooting patterns among coexisting species have been recognized as an important mechanism for generating biodiversity effects on ecosystem functioning. However, it is not yet clear whether complementarity in root space exploration is a universal characteristic of multi-species woody communities. In a temperate broad-leaved forest with a mosaic of species-poor and species-rich stands, we tested two hypotheses related to putative below-ground ‘overyielding’ in more diverse forests, (1) that species mixture results in a partial spatial segregation of the fine root systems of different species, and (2) that stand fine root biomass increases with tree species diversity. We investigated 12 stands either with one, three, or five dominant tree species (4 replicate stands each) under similar soil and climate conditions for stand fine root biomass and spatial root segregation in vertical and horizontal direction in the soil. Fine roots of different tree species were identified using a morphological key based on differences in colour, periderm surface structure, and branching patterns. In species-poor and species-rich stands, and in all tree species present, fine root density (biomass per soil volume) decreased exponentially with soil depth at very similar rates. Stand fine root biomass in the densely rooted upper soil (0–40 cm depth) was not significantly different between stands with 1, 3 or 5 dominant tree species. We conclude that ‘below-ground overyielding’ in terms of higher fine root biomasses in species-rich stands as compared to monospecific ones does not occur in these broad-leaved forests which most likely results from a missing complementarity in vertical rooting patterns of the present tree species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b8650ea620a11f01bd009869fbe9f5e6> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Two species of Digenea are recorded from the intestine of Percichthys trucha (Percichthydae) from Patagonian water bodies. Polylekithum percai n. sp. (Allocreadiidae) is distinguished by its body size, the relative size of the suckers, the anterior extension of the vitelline fields, the number of eggs in the uterus and the different species of fish host from the two previously described species of Polylekithum. Homalometron (= Austrocreadium) papilliferum (Szidat, 1956) n. comb. is redescribed. Due to its spined tegument and the absence of a cirrus-sac, this species is considered a member of the family Apocreadiidae." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4216f7ef3a9a3531ffe2007f69fedd6b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract. Mangroves are important wetlands along tropical and subtropical coasts that have been seriously damaged due to excessive exploitation. The need to conserve mangroves has been recognized since the 1970s. The degree of mangrove conservation ranges from rigid ecological conservation (for \"posterity\") to sustainable exploitation (for \"prosperity\"), dependent on the needs and requirements of different regions. In Hong Kong, mangrove resources were rapidly destroyed in the last decades due to massive reclamation and infra-structural developments. To conserve the remaining mangroves in Hong Kong, a comprehensive ecological study was conducted in 1994–1997 to understand the ecological characteristics and current status of mangrove swamps, and 44 remaining swamps were classified into five categories according to overall conservation values. The conservation of Hong Kong mangroves is generally more towards \"posterity\" with strong emphasis on protecting biodiversity and maintaining ecological processes. Different conservation strategies have been recommended and promoting public awareness is one of the most important strategies. The possibility of using mangrove wetlands to remove pollutants appeared to be an attractive way to increase public awareness and educate the community. However, more research is needed to obtain a better understanding of pollutant assimilative capacity, long-term effects of wastewater-borne pollutants, costs and life span of such a mangrove wastewater treatment facility." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2d95397fae4ba57b8c3bdba1c28b1730> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The growth and egg development times of Daphnia longispina from two eutrophic habitats in southern England were studied using similar methods and fully acclimated animals. Habitat differences in both these parameters are demonstrated and are discussed in relation to possible genetical dissimilarities between the populations. The sex ratio of offspring of animals from the two habitats also differed and this is discussed in terms of the populations' history. Data on the growth of male animals are illustrated and shown to be different from that of females." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d840b32ee4c55fe0c1b9e8a2977ba389> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract In this study, we built up a database of 570 species from an alpine meadow on the eastern Tsinghai–Tibet plateau. We examined the correlation of seed mass and germination with phylogeny, habitat and altitude, and the relationship between seed mass and germination. We found that: habitats had no significant effects on seed mass and germinability, which was in accord with the former studies; there was a significant negative correlation between seed mass and altitude, as well as between germinability and altitude, which was opposite to most of the former studies; there was a significant negative correlation between seed mass and germinability, which was in contrast with other studies that have found a positive relationship, and seed mass could explain 24.1% of total variation in germinability; in GLM, family and genus accounted for 43.9% and 83.9% of total variation in seed mass, and 34.1% and 65.4% in germinability, respectively, thus, it was evident that seed mass and germinability were strongly related to phylogeny. We considered that seed mass and germination might be the result of both selective pressures over long-term ecological time and the constraints over long-standing evolutionary history of the taxonomic membership. We suggest that correlates of ecology and phylogeny should be taken into account in comparative studies on seed mass and germination among species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4f234e3e7b75f661f060c8f1f8f22586> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Background and AimsFuture climate conditions (warmer, wetter) are expected to change aboveground plant communities with linked belowground alterations (e.g. porewater chemistry) that can influence carbon dynamics. The aims of this study were 1) to determine if porewater phenolic compound concentrations reflect the changing aboveground plant community and 2) to elucidate if changes in phenolic compounds alter belowground carbon release. MethodsWe monitored the changes in vegetation biomass, porewater phenolic compound concentrations, respired CO2 and phenol oxidase enzyme activity in 84 intact peatland mesocosms exposed to elevated atmospheric CO2, elevated temperature, and decreased water table conditions in a full factorial design. ResultsPhenolic compound concentrations were indicative of the vascular plant expansion that occurred under warmer and anaerobic conditions, suggesting that phenolic compounds could be a simple indicator of northern plant community dynamics. Ecosystem CO2 respiration increased with rising phenolic compound concentrations, suggesting that phenolic compounds can decrease microbial carbon use efficiency in northern peatlands. ConclusionsUsing an aboveground-belowground framework we present a previously unrecognized mechanism influencing northern carbon dynamics; wherein, climate change conditions can restructure the plant community composition in turn increasing porewater phenolic concentrations, which results in decreased microbial carbon use efficiency and enhanced carbon release." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f82b94d834070db52badcda369a26d8b> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The identification and characterization of the phosphate preservation of the spherical microfossils in the Ediacaran Doushantuo time and the Early Cambrian has long been controversial. Modern artificial simulation experiments of phosphate animal eggs can provide scientific evidence to settle the aforementioned disputes. This experiment simulated environmental changes to observe the early morphological changes of the Bluntnose black bream eggs (Megalobrama amblycephala). It was found that the eggs can show a different morphology in the phosphate environment and that these eggs exhibited considerable morphological variations under different conditions. Thus, those eggs cannot be ascribed to the same species based only on the features. The experimental results are expected to provide a useful reference for the identification of phosphatized microfossils and provide a more empirical basis for their genesis." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/02a47a69a7a4e8b74c79800e2bafec77> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract In recent years Lake Mariut was subjected to severe pollution. The phosphate content of this Lake was exceedingly higher than that of the other Egyptian Lakes. The distribution of phosphates in Lake Mariut was found to depend upon certain factors which were discussed." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/c4b21273975b8d6373b583fa59349c6f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract In principle, the intensity of sexual conflict is best measured as a loss of fitness associated with the expression of conflict-related traits. But because the relevant traits may be difficult to manipulate and fitness difficult to assess, proxy variables linked to conflict intensity may provide important tools for empirical measurement. Here we identify two common types of sexual conflict—one within mating pairs over the less expensive male role, and one between mating pairs and intruders seeking to obtain fertilizations—and consider how they vary in intensity along gradients of population density and predation risk. To do this, we develop and analyze a model of mating dynamics in the chalk bass, an egg-trading simultaneous hermaphrodite that lives on Caribbean coral reefs. In this species, within-pair sexual conflict leads each female-role partner to provide in each mating episode only a subset (parcel) of its egg clutch to its mate for fertilization. Pair-intruder sexual conflict (i.e., sperm competition) increases the proportion of the gonad allocated to male function. In the model, more parceling and greater male allocation both resulted in lower fitness at the ESS, our measure of conflict intensity. Male allocation increased along the density gradient but decreased along the predation-risk gradient, reflecting shifts in intrusion frequency. Parcel number sharply increased and then decreased more gradually along a gradient of increasing local density, initially responding to increased availability of alternative mates across low densities and then to diminishing clutch size toward higher densities. Parcel number decreased with predation risk as each mating episode became more dangerous. Conflict intensities were usually greatest at intermediate positions along the two environmental gradients, and each conflict ameliorated the intensity of the other. Overall, parceling and sex allocation may be good though imperfect proxies for intensities of within-pair and pair-intruder sexual conflicts among chalk bass." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/1ec8d90a1c1d31fb06b2f606b8a821f5> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Transparency reduces the chances of detection of large planktonic animals by visual predators. An important constraint on the transparency of planktonic animals may be ingested food which could be seen through the body, thereby increasing the vulnerability of transparent zooplankton to visual predators. To test this hypothesis, we presented fed and un-fed Chaoborus larvae to juvenile coho salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch). Overall, the presence of prey in the gut of Chaoborus increased their probability of capture by 68%. Predation risks due to the visibility of ingested food increased in proportion to meal size: larvae with nearly full gut were captured about three times faster on the average than larvae which had little food in their gut. Although Chaoborus larvae may be able to reduce this increased predation risk by migrating downward to low light levels, this behavior would reduce feeding opportunities by removing the larvae from surface waters where prey density is generally high. In this way, visual predators may limit the growth and the maximum size that can be achieved by transparent animals." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/10a3ed6dc2ff0dc4f4e145b0e3e1d597> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Samples of small rodent populations inhabiting Crabapple Island on Beldany Lake in NE Poland revealed that Clethrionomys glareolus was continously present there, whereas Apodemus flavicollis and Microtus agrestis appeared, stayed for some period, vanished and reappeared. It appears that sexually mature females of the bank vole are strictly territorial, their numbers are limited, and immature individuals hardly disperse at high population size. Sexually mature females of the yellow-necked mouse seem to be territorial only at low population numbers, and their numbers increase linearly with population size. Sexually mature females of the field vole exhibit high level of aggregation, and their numbers increase in streight line with growing population size. We discuss the idea that different social organization of the rodent populations is connected with various strategies (sedentary and nomadic) supporting local population persistence." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/0ac6a80cb722f67334eda9280e60be3a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Food availability influences multiple stages of the breeding cycle of birds, and supplementary feeding has helped in its understanding. Most supplementation studies have reported advancements of laying, whilst others, albeit less numerous, have also demonstrated fitness benefits such as larger clutches, shorter incubation periods, and greater hatching success. Relatively few studies, however, have investigated the effects of supplementary feeding for protracted periods across multiple stages of the breeding cycle. These effects are important to understand since long-term food supplementation of birds is recommended in urban habitats and is used as a tool to increase reproductive output in endangered species. Here, we compare the breeding phenology and productivity of blue tits Cyanistes caeruleus and great tits Parus major breeding in food-supplemented and non-supplemented blocks in a broadleaf woodland in central England over three seasons (2006–2008). Supplementation was provided continuously from several weeks pre-laying until hatching, and had multiple significant effects. Most notably, supplementation reduced brood size significantly in both species, by half a chick or more at hatching (after controlling for year and hatching date). Reduced brood sizes in supplemented pairs were driven by significantly smaller clutches in both species and, in blue tits, significantly lower hatching success. These are novel and concerning findings of food supplementation. As expected, supplementary feeding advanced laying and shortened incubation periods significantly in both species. We discuss the striking parallels between our findings and patterns in blue and great tit reproduction in urban habitats, and conclude that supplementary feeding may not always enhance the breeding productivity of birds." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4eb0aa333dfa8a64b9919664eddae34d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Plant species richness of twenty old-growth forest reserves in the cool-temperate zone in the Kanto region, Japan were investigated to detect the effect of forest fragmentation. The species richness of trees and forest floor plants were analyzed by multiple regression models relating to nine variables on the characteristics of landscape, local habitat and forest stand. The total species diversity did not have a significant correlation with any variables of landscape patterns. In this study, single large reserve in the ‘SLOSS’ discussion did not seem very effective to preserve more species. However, forest reserves in large patches tend to have relatively infrequent species. Large patches of natural forests were regarded as one of the important factors to preserve infrequent species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/95e407b0462925388417aa8cb7ff49f0> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Riparian meadows in the western US are highly productive areas withinthe riparian corridor that have been extensively utilized for livestock grazingand that are often degraded. This study aimed to increase our understanding ofboth the functional responses and restoration potential of mesic meadow systemsin central Nevada, USA. Nitrogen addition and clipping treatments were used toexamine grazing effects, while aeration and revegetation were included toevaluate potential restoration treatments. Belowground response was determinedby examining gravimetric soil water content and rooting depth and activity.Aboveground response was determined for two key mesic meadow species,Carex nebrascensis and Poa pratensis,by quantifying gas exchange and water relations. Large yearly and seasonaldifferences among water tables largely determined the rooting activity anddepthin these mesic meadows and influenced treatment responses. Little rootingactivity occurred within or at the surface of the water table and rooting depthincreased as water table level lowered during the growing season. In general,nitrogen addition decreased rooting activity and depth relative to controls. Itresulted in less negative water potentials and photosynthetic rates that werehigher early in the growing season, but lower later in the growing season. Theeffects of nitrogen addition could be attributed to accelerated phenology andearlier senescence. Clipping resulted in less negative plant water potentialsinCarex and Poa, andPoa had higher photosynthetic rates immediately afterclipping but only for certain dates and comparisons. Aeration increased rootingactivity and depth where there was no confounding effect of water table. Also,predawn and midday water potentials were generally less negative forCarex and Poa in aerated plots.Establishment on the revegetation plots was dominated by annual and early seralspecies and, consequently, these plots exhibited reduced rooting depth andactivity early in the growing season and high root turnover. Results indicatethat water table depth and its effects on soil water are dominant factors indetermining the functional processes and recovery potentials of these riparianmeadows. Clipping had minimal effects on above- and belowground responses,perhaps because clipping was performed late in the growing season after plantshad begun to senescence. Nitrogen addition decreased rooting activity andaltered phenology, indicating deleterious effects. Aeration was effective atovercoming some of the negative affects of overgrazing and may be an effectiverestoration treatment. However, revegetation may have limited potential due toestablishment constraints of the dominant species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/fa2b92e46450f0abb885681a9ec02c4c> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary 1.Adult females of the predaceous copepod, Diacyclops thomasi, consistently selected for the soft-bodied rotifers Synchaeta pectinata, Polyarthra major and P. remata when presented various combinations of 8 rotifer species and 2 crustacean species as prey. Diacyclops did not select for other small, soft-bodied rotifers such as P. vulgaris and Ascomorpha ecaudis and, for loricate species such as Keratella cochlearis, K. crassa and for large soft-bodied adult Asplanchna priodonta. The small cladocerans, Bosmina longirostris and Chydorus sphaericus also were resistant to predation by this copepod.2.Increased hunger in Diacyclops increased the clearance rates on both vulnerable and Diacyclops-resistant prey but did not greatly increase mortality of resistant prey relative to vulnerable prey. Sated Diacyclops preferred small, vulnerable prey like P. major over larger-bodied Synchaeta. This effect may be attributed to limited gut space when food is abundant.3.When Diacyclops was presented different relative proportions of Keratella and Synchaeta at a constant total prey density (500 prey/L), it selected Synchaeta over Keratella in all trial proportions. However, Diacyclops selected more strongly for Keratella (but at a much lower clearance rate than for Synchaeta) when the relative abundance of this predator-resistant species was greatest. These results support optimal foraging in this predator.4.Predator-prey interactions of the kind reported in this study can help identify important food web pathways and can be used to interpret predator-mediated changes in zooplankton communities in mature." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/5dcd579bb8124cb0b2272daedeabf7fc> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract. Life-cycle and foraging patterns of native Bombus terrestris populations were investigated at two sites in the Mediterranean region of Turkey, Phassalis (0 – 100 m above sea level [a.s.l.]) and Termessos (500 – 700 m a.s.l.). Bumble-bee activity was recorded during standard bee walks from November 2003 until the end of October 2004, each site being visited three times every month during the one-year period. The yearly dynamics of flight, the flowering plant species visited, and the visitation frequencies of these plants were recorded during every bee walk at both sites. There were considerable differences between the two populations with regard to the dates when the queens emerged from diapause (the emerging season), the timing of the appearance of sexuals (young queens and males), and the total number of plant species visited. Bombus terrestris queens emerged from diapause in November-December at the Phassalis site (coastal area) and in February-March at the Termessos site. The queens aestivated at the Phassalis site, whereas they hibernated at the Termessos site. Only one generation per year was produced at each site. The duration of the queens’ diapause lasted 5 – 8 months and length of the life cycle 190 – 215 days. Native B. terrestris populations were noted to forage on 47 flowering plant species from 20 families (10 at the Phassalis site and 40 at the Termessos site) during the study period. Two of the plant species (Arbutus unedo L. and Vitex agnus-castus L.) have long flowering periods and play a crucial role in the life cycle of native B. terrestris populations. The emergence of queens at the aestivation site was synchronized with the flowering of Arbutus unedo L., while the emergence of sexuals coincided with the flowering of Vitex agnus-castus L. at both sites." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/5d4a0027f2deadd7773dc5a5fbe258a1> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract From a conservationist perspective, seahorses are threatened fishes. Concomitantly, from a socioeconomic perspective, they represent a source of income to many fishing communities in developing countries. An integration between these two views requires, among other things, the recognition that seahorse fishers have knowledge and abilities that can assist the implementation of conservation strategies and of management plans for seahorses and their habitats. This paper documents the knowledge held by Brazilian fishers on the biology and ecology of the longsnout seahorse Hippocampus reidi. Its aims were to explore collaborative approaches to seahorse conservation and management in Brazil; to assess fishers' perception of seahorse biology and ecology, in the context evaluating potential management options; to increase fishers' involvement with seahorse conservation in Brazil. Data were obtained through questionnaires and interviews made during field surveys conducted in fishing villages located in the States of Piauí, Ceará, Paraíba, Maranhão, Pernambuco and Pará. We consider the following aspects as positive for the conservation of seahorses and their habitats in Brazil: fishers were willing to dialogue with researchers; although captures and/or trade of brooding seahorses occurred, most interviewees recognized the importance of reproduction to the maintenance of seahorses in the wild (and therefore of their source of income), and expressed concern over population declines; fishers associated the presence of a ventral pouch with reproduction in seahorses (regardless of them knowing which sex bears the pouch), and this may facilitate the construction of collaborative management options designed to eliminate captures of brooding specimens; fishers recognized microhabitats of importance to the maintenance of seahorse wild populations; fishers who kept seahorses in captivity tended to recognize the condtions as poor, and as being a cause of seahorse mortality." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/bc83d83faf263d903bbe495437ecbb2c> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Species richness patterns along altitudinal gradients are well-documented ecological phenomena, yet very little data are available on how environmental filtering processes influence the composition and traits of butterfly assemblages at high altitudes. We have studied the diversity patterns of butterfly species at 34 sites along an altitudinal gradient ranging from 600 to 2,000 m a.s.l. in the National Park Berchtesgaden (Germany) and analysed traits of butterfly assemblages associated with dispersal capacity, reproductive strategies and developmental time from lowlands to highlands, including phylogenetic analyses. We found a linear decline in butterfly species richness along the altitudinal gradient, but the phylogenetic relatedness of the butterfly assemblages did not increase with altitude. Compared to butterfly assemblages at lower altitudes, those at higher altitudes were composed of species with larger wings (on average 9 %) which laid an average of 68 % more eggs. In contrast, egg maturation time in butterfly assemblages decreased by about 22 % along the altitudinal gradient. Further, butterfly assemblages at higher altitudes were increasingly dominated by less widespread species. Based on our abundance data, but not on data in the literature, population density increased with altitude, suggesting a reversed density–distribution relationship, with higher population densities of habitat specialists in harsh environments. In conclusion, our data provide evidence for significant shifts in the composition of butterfly assemblages and for the dominance of different traits along the altitudinal gradient. In our study, these changes were mainly driven by environmental factors, whereas phylogenetic filtering played a minor role along the studied altitudinal range." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/e656290b8b24310b2787d9c4c0c54c05> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Spirotetramat is a new systemic insecticide listed in Group 23 of the IRAC mode-of-action classification scheme as an inhibitor of lipid biosynthesis. Side effects assessment on key natural enemies is necessary before incorporating a pesticide in IPM programs. Herein, lethal and sublethal side effects of spirotetramat on adults and larvae of Cryptolaemus montrouzieri Mulsant (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae) were evaluated under laboratory conditions by topical application and by ingestion of treated individuals of Planococcus citri Risso (Hemiptera: Pseudococcidae). The lethal and sublethal effects of spirotetramat were compared to those of chlorpyriphos and pyriproxyfen, two insecticides commonly used in Spanish citrus. Spirotetramat resulted harmless: (1) when directly applied on larvae and adults of C. montrouzieri, since it did not affect survival, longevity, fecundity, egg hatching, and offspring survival. In contrast, chlorpyriphos was classified as moderately toxic for adults due to its effects on fecundity, egg hatching and offspring survival. Pyriproxyfen was classified as harmful for larvae due to the acute effect on pupal mortality. When larvae and adults of C. montrouzieri were fed with treated prey, spirotetramat was also classified as harmless. Adults of C. montrouzieri fed with pyriproxyfen-treated prey exhibited increased fecundity but no eggs hatched. Moreover, the larvae fed on pyriproxyfen-treated prey did not reach the adult stage. The results of this study indicate that spirotetramat may be compatible with augmentative releases of C. montrouzieri in citrus." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/3766a218928e42805e1d9921ae63d917> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Black poplar (Populus nigra L.) is a widely distributed species that plays a crucial role in riparian forest ecosystems. Due to a reduction in its natural habitats and hybridization with introduced poplar species clones, its genetic pool is decreasing and efforts are required to preserve this species. Seeds of black poplar are short-lived and quickly lose viability during conventional storage in gene banks. Therefore, in order to preserve ex situ the genetic diversity of this species, the feasibility of seed cryopreservation in liquid nitrogen (at −196 °C, LN) for periods of 24 h and 2 years was investigated. Seeds were harvested from three individual trees (two provenances) and desiccated to different levels of water content (WC) in the range of 0.02–0.35 g g−1 (g H2O/g dry mass, g g−1) prior to immersion in LN. Seed germination was assessed after each treatment. P. nigra seeds tolerated desiccation to WC 0.07 g g−1 but after severe desiccation to WC <0.05 g g−1 exhibited a significant reduction in germination. Results indicated that all black poplar seeds, regardless of origin, year of harvesting and seed quality, could be cryopreserved for 24 h when their WC was in the range of 0.11–0.17 g g−1. Physiology of P. nigra seeds showed in this paper is consistent with attributes of intermediate seed storage behavior. This study provides a foundation for using cryopreservation for the ex situ conservation of P. nigra seeds." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/558c3d42410ea5a4cae43f23c32c5776> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Theory suggests that species with different traits will respond differently to landscape fragmentation. Studies have shown that the presence of species in fragments of varying size, shape and connectivity is dependent on plant traits related to dispersal ability, persistence and disturbance tolerance. However, the role of traits in determining long-term plant community changes in response to changing landscape context is not well understood. We used data from resurveys of 184 plots to test the ability of nine plant traits to predict colonizations and extirpations between 1968 and 2009 based on the surrounding landscape context. We related apparent colonizations and extirpations to road density, naturally vegetated area and patch shape and then tested for significant relationships between a tendency for positive or negative associations and plant traits. Exotic, herbaceous, annual, shade-intolerant species and species with higher specific leaf area were more likely than others to colonize plots with higher road density, lower amount of naturally vegetated area and higher edge-to-area ratio. However, extirpations were rarely predictable based on traits. The role of landscape context in structuring plant community change over the past four decades in the 184 plots resurveyed was largely mediated by colonization events, suggesting that trait-based extirpations occur with a longer post-fragmentation time lag or, alternatively, that extirpation is more stochastic with respect to plant traits than is colonization." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/89c77a4aa6beeb7685c8f990982e43a3> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Contrasted and periodic vegetation patterns are observed throughout thesemi-arid tropics. The relation between individual species and the‘overall’ pattern has been investigated from a study site in NorthWest Burkina Faso (West Africa), which displayed periodic woody patterns withvarying levels of contrast and isotropy. The woody vegetation was described fromtwo field plots (320 by 320 ), within which woodyindividuals were either mapped or counted (in quadrats of 10 by10 ). A banded pattern of high intensity (tiger bush on hardsandstone, plot PTG) was compared with a less precise pattern on more favourableedaphic conditions (plot PSP). The periodic nature of the vegetation under studywas directly addressed by interpreting spatial auto- and cross-covariancefunctions through spectra of spatial frequencies (spectral analysis). Theoverall pattern of vegetation was analysed from digitised aerial photographs,while distributions of individual species were characterised from field data. Inboth plots, the densest species (Combretum micranthum G.Don), though only dominant in PTG, had a spatial distribution that closelymatched the overall pattern. Pterocarpus lucens Lepr wasco-dominant in both plots although fairly independent on the periodic pattern.Several species displayed a positive link with the periodic pattern that wasquite loose in PSP and tighter in PTG. This tighter link was concomitant withlower densities for most species. Indeed, only C.micranthum clearly benefited from the high intensity pattern with adensity seven times higher in PTG than in PSP. Consequently, species richnessand diversity were lower in PTG. A single species proved hence of overwhelmingimportance in accounting for the periodic pattern and its persistence throughtime. Spatial distributions of other species pointed rather towardsindividualistic responses to the opportunity/constraint provided by theperiodic pattern in presence of different levels of edaphic and climatic stress." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2912432bbc0152da13be67a599559bbc> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Variation in gut length of closely related animals is known to generally be a good predictor of dietary habits. We examined gut length in 28 species of butterflyfishes (Chaetodontidae), which encompass a wide range of dietary types (planktivores, omnivores, and corallivores). We found general dietary patterns to be a good predictor of relative gut length, although we found high variation among groups and covariance with body size. The longest gut lengths are found in species that exclusively feed on the living tissue of corals, while the shortest gut length is found in a planktivorous species. Although we tried to control for phylogeny, corallivory has arisen multiple times in this family, confounding our analyses. The butterflyfishes, a speciose family with a wide range of dietary habits, may nonetheless provide an ideal system for future work studying gut physiology associated with specialization and foraging behaviors." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/5ce13170cf445f7ee2a7888903d85338> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Small animals differ from large animals in their relative and absolute metabolic requirements and energetic expenditures. A preliminary study of the behavioral effects of these size dependent variables were investigated in two arboreal, sympatric and frugivorous anthropoid species:Macaca fascicularis andPongo pygmaeus. Data on both species were collected in East Kalimantan, Indonesia during a 20-month field study which focused onM. fascicularis. There are marked size dependent behavioral differences between the two species which show the constraints of large body size. Existing hypotheses of the selective advantage of large body size in the orang-utan have either overlooked its advantages by describing it as a remnant of Pleistocene terrestriality and predator defense or attributed its advantage to greater access to resources. Contrasts between the energetics of foraging in the monkey and the ape suggest an alternate hypothesis for selection of large body size relating to the increased capacity of large body size to store fat energy and to subsist on lower quality foods in a relatively marked spatial-temporal unpredictable microhabitat of fruiting and flowering trees. Body size and energetics may play an important role in our models of the evolution of behavior and in the evolution of the great apes." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a69ccfe17464056db6059ae7b6d8e283> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The actual prey in the orb webs of four araneid spiders (Nephila clavipes, Eriophora fuliginea, Argiope argentata, and A. savignyi) and the relative abundance of their potential prey (pitfall traps, yellow traps, and sweep-netting) was investigated over 1 year at different locations in Panama. The relative abundance of insects and spiders depends on seasonal fluctuations (Fig. 2) which are reflected by corresponding variations in the effectiveness of the webs. The main prey groups are Nematocera (50%–68%), winged Formicoidea (6%–15%) and Hymenoptera, Coleoptera, and Brachycera (4%–10% each) (Fig. 4-6). The remaining 10%–17% of the prey comes from up to 26 other groups (Table 2). Differences in prey size and prey composition between the spider species are small (Fig. 7). Most prey items are 1–2 mm long: only a few insects exceed 30 mm body length (Figs. 9–12). Relative to the available prey, some groups (e.g. Nematocera, Aphidoidea, Psocoptera) are caught selectively, while other groups (e.g. Heteroptera, Coleoptera, Brachycera, Orthoptera) are underrepresented in the prey spectrum and obviously avoid orb webs (Table 7). The differences in prey composition between araneids of the tropics and of the temperate zone are discussed (Table 8) and compared to those recorded in other studies (Table 9, 10). Most of these report large numbers of big prey items (Odonata, Lepidoptera, wasps/bees). It is pointed out that those studies do not take into account the total available prey in a spider's web but only that part which the spider selects from the web (mainly according to size). The importance of small prey items even for large spiders is explained and an obvious lack of niche partitioning among coexisting araneids is discussed (Table 11)." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/77d8b83f3273314382d5a6cd086c1b67> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Although cascading effects of top predators can help structure communities, their influence may vary across habitats that differentially protect prey. Therefore, to understand how and to what degree habitat complexity can affect trophic interactions in adjacent habitats, we used a combination of a broad regional-scale survey, manipulative field trials, and an outdoor mesocosm experiment to quantify predator–prey interaction strengths across four trophic levels. Within estuaries of the southeastern USA, bonnethead sharks (Sphyrna tiburo) hunt blue crabs on mudflats and adjacent oyster reefs, two habitats with vastly different aboveground structure. Using 12-h tethering trials of blue crabs we quantified habitat-dependent loss rates of 37% on reefs and 78% on mudflats. We hypothesized that the sharks’ predatory effects on blue crabs would cascade down to release a lower-level mud crab predator, which subsequently would increase juvenile oyster mortality, but that the cascade strength would be habitat-dependent. We experimentally manipulated predator combinations in split-plot mesocosms containing reef and mudflat habitats, and quantified oyster mortality. Bonnetheads exerted strong consumptive and non-consumptive effects on blue crabs, which ceased eating oysters in the sharks’ presence. However, mud crabs, regardless of shark and blue crab presence, continued to consume oysters, especially within the structural refuge of the reef where they kept oyster mortality high. Thus, bonnetheads indirectly boosted oyster survival, but only on the mudflat where mud crabs were less active. Our work demonstrates how structural differences in adjacent habitats can moderate trophic cascades, particularly when mesopredators exhibit differential use of structure and different sensitivities to top predators." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/485408e62597d24a751459d46a24122a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract 40 population samples of 17 GreekFritillaria species were examined morphologically using 22 attributes carefully selected, with a high discriminating ability. Principal component analysis with a nearest neighbour directed network and cluster analysis were used to evaluate the phenetic similarities among the species. The evidence presented here suggests: (1) A close relationship betweenF. erhartii andF. obliqua and their possible origin fromF. bithynica. (2) A strong alliance betweenF. rixii, F. euboeica, F. carica, andF. drenovskii (groupF. sibthorpiana). (3) A link between theF. epirotica andF. graeca group and some affinities betweenF. pontica, F. gussichiae, andF. graeca. Finally it is proposed thatF. tuntasia be reduced to subspecific status asF. obliqua subsp.tuntasia." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/c1b042e507ae5c28f275e57fb5ac50e4> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "The possibility of detecting extended metal objects at the bottom of fresh-water reservoirs from the reduction in the spreading resistance between electrodes submerged in the water is demonstrated. A formula is obtained for the relative change in the spreading resistance in the presence of an isolated extended conductor. Results of laboratory and natural experiments are presented." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f8b006b8241d5e811c6c5feb70913545> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract This study evaluated the effects of environmental and biological variables on the toxicity (LC50) of mercuric chloride on the fish Notopterus notopterus. The results reveal that the change in temperature, dissolved oxygen, pH and fish size in experiments is highly significant both at 1 and 5% levels except in size, where it is insignificant at 1% level." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/c9ac2a99520ad1986e027ebec9bdd71d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Artificial aerial predators elicit different responses from two geographically isolated populations of Trinidad guppies (Poecilia reticulata) and their laboratory-reared progeny. The variation in behavior presumably reflects geographic differences in the selection pressures exerted by aquatic versus aerial predators." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ae802fc5ad7bad7e0dbb20862d9511c9> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The reproductive period of Rana temporaria can be subdivided into a prespawning period and a spawning period. During the prespawning period only a few Rana temporaria, most of them males, are active in the spawning biotope. There is no calling activity, and deposition of spawn rarely occurs. The time of onset of the prespawning period is variable. In this period the frogs are highly responsive to a drop in the temperature of air and water, burying themselves in the bottom or leaving the spawning waters. By contrast, many animals participate in the spawning period. Migration to the spawning ground takes place chiefly at night. The frogs engage in mating activity immediately upon arrival, and both males and females depart as soon as they have spawned, migrating away in directions corresponding to those of the immigration. During the spawning period there is no demonstrable response of the grass frogs to weather conditions. Rana temporaria begins its spawning period at the so-called “set time” only in meteorologically normal years. When meteorological conditions are unusual, the spawning period can begin as much as 10 days earlier or later. Possible external timing signals for the onset of migration include temperature in combination with day length, and a drop in atmospheric pressure accompanied by rainfall." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ff5df8aa1dc4f7bf58b59208c6c3c729> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract We studied egg size variation of Tengmalm's owls in western Finland during 1981–1990. The owls fed on voles whose population fluctuated in a predictable manner: low (1981, 1984, 1987, 1990), increase (1982, 1985, 1988) and peak (1983, 1986, 1986) phases of the cycle occurred every third year. Eggs were largest in the increase phase of the vole cycle, even though that voles were more abundant and egg-laying started earlier in the peak phase than in the increase phase. This suggests that owls invest mostly in egg size when vole abundance increases along with survival chances of offspring. Territory quality and female age had no effects on egg size, but egg size decreased with laying data in the increase phase of the vole cycle. Egg size was significantly positively related to the male age in the increase phase, but the opposite relationship was significant in the peak phase of the vole cycle. The partners of adult males also decreased their egg volume from the increase to the peak phase, whereas the partners of yearling males produced their largest eggs in the peak phase of the vole cycle. This suggests the importance of experience in prevailing food fluctuations. Possibly male Tengmalm's owls can adjust the intensity of courtship feeding not only in relation to the food abundance on their territories at the time of egg laying, but also to the survival prospects of their offspring. Phenotypic plasticity seems to play a substantial role, as the egg size repeatabilities of individual females and partners of individual males were low. Obviously, under cyclic food conditions, predictability and inter-generational trade-offs are important to life history traits." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/343211974672bc5dd8105c74828e9c54> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract How do effects from perturbations such as irrigation and grazing that have an impact at one stage of the recruitment process (e.g., seedling) affect performance at later stages (e.g., adult)? Such effects may be transferred to later stages without any further change (transferred effects), reinforced by a similar effect so that their importance increases (accumulative effect), or counteracted at later stages by an opposite effect (counteractive effect). We analysed the predominance of transferred, accumulative, and counteractive effects depending on (1) organization level (community, functional group, and species levels), (2) life cycle stage (seeds, seedlings, and adults), (3) grass/forb functional group (forbs versus grasses), and (4) seed mass (small-seeded species, medium-seeded species, and large-seeded species). The study was conducted in Alcalá de Henares, central Spain. During one annual cycle, we counted the number of readily germinable seeds (3,909 seeds: 2,156 forbs and 1,753 grasses), emerged seedlings (2,126 seedlings: 1,238 forbs and 888 grasses), and surviving seedlings up to reproductive adult status (917 adults: 217 forbs and 700 grasses) of all species (74 species) in a factorial field experiment under three different simulated rainfall and three seasonal sheep grazing regimes in a natural Mediterranean annual plant community composed of forbs (dicotyledonous herbs) and grasses (monocotyledonous herbs). Our main results were: (1) the proportion of transferred and counteractive effects was similar between the three studied organization levels (community, functional group, and species levels); (2) we detected many more counteractive effects in the seedling stage than in the adult stage; (3) we did not find more counteractive effects in forbs versus grasses, but transferred effects were more frequent in grasses; and (4) we found more counteractive effects with decreasing seed mass and more transferred effects with increasing seed mass. Our main conclusions were that the prevalence of counteractive effects reduces the sensitivity of the whole recruitment process and enhances the relative importance of the final stage (adults). The prevalence of transferred effects makes the recruitment process more predictable and more dependent on the early stages (seeds and seedlings)." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/629f4a046e92e8d7db41f3cd4ccb1b70> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary In the Atacama Desert of northern Chile, cacti of the genus Copiapoa occur in extensive, relatively dense, monospecific stands. The spatial distribution patterns within several stands of Copiapoa cinerea v. columna-alba were analyzed for evidence of competitive interactions among individuals. There was no indication that competition was affecting stand density. Mean annual precipitation is only 25 mm/yr, but estimates of maximum possible water use within a stand were much lower. It was shown that the time between rainstorms is long compared to the water storage capacity of the plant stems, especially in the case of small individuals. We conclude that population densities in Copiapoa are limited by the difficulty of establishment, not by competition." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/aee92ded3b0d35c278aa1731b2e15b30> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The specialisation of the beetles from the Petite Camargue on Salix nigricans was confirmed by laboratory food-plant trials. When S. nigricans is not present in the choice offered, other Salix species are accepted and the following ranking, in decreasing order of preference, can be established: S. nigricans, S. purpurea, Populus nigra, P. tremula, S. alba, s. caprea and S. cinerea. S. nigricans leaves are the richest in salicin of the 4 most acceptable plant species. The 3 least acceptable species have the undersurface of their leaves covered with trichomes. The food-plant preferences of 2 populations from central Europe and 2 from Belgium differ both in the field and in the laboratory. The level of dietary specialisation also differs from population to population. The populations originating from localities (Oignie in Belgium and the Petite Camargue in central Europe) where their favorite food-plants in the field and in the laboratory (respectively P. tremula and S. nigricans) are abundant, show clearer preferences than the populations from localities (Grammont in Belgium and Herrliberg in central Europe) where these plants are scarcer or even absent, due to human influence. The Salicaceae tested, as seen by the more specialised beetles of Oignie and the Petite Camargue, include both a strongly preferred plant (P. tremula or S. nigricans) and two or three strongly disliked species (S. alba, S. caprea and S. cinerea). for these beetles, laboratory preferences and field observations of host plant species are in agreement. It is interesting that S. nigricans, although not present in Belgium, is the second most preferred food of the Belgian beetles in laboratory trials. Similarly, P. tremula, the preferred food of the Belgian beetles, is well accepted by the central European beetles. For the less specialised beetles of Grammont and Herrliberg, the same Salicaceae include strongly disliked speicies but no single strongly preferred species. In the Herrliberg population, with rather poorly defined preferences, preference for the favorite species of the more specific population from the same geographical area (Petite Camargue) can readily be produced in the laboratory by conditioning." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/17a7428e56d462b45b1a002b11f27985> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Woody corridors in fragmented landscapes have been proposed as alternative habitats for forest plants, but the great variation in species-specific responses blurs the overall assessment. The aim of this study was to estimate the dispersal success of forest-dwelling plants from a stand into and along an attached woody corridor, and to explain the observed patterns from the point of view of species’ dispersal traits and corridor properties. We sampled 47 forest–corridor transects in the agricultural landscapes of southeastern Estonia. Regionally common forest-dwelling species (observed in at least 10 % of seed-source forests) were classified on the basis of their ecological response profile—forest-restricted species (F-type) and forest-dwelling generalists (G-type). Species richness and the proportion of F-type species decreased sharply from the seed-source forest core to the forest edge and to the first 10–15 m of the corridor, while G-type species richness remained constant throughout the transect. Corridor structure had a species-specific effect—F species were promoted by old (≥50 years) and wide (≥10 m) corridors, while G species were supported by young and narrow corridors with ditch-related soil disturbances. Moderate shade (canopy cover <75 %) was optimal for all forest-dwelling species. Large dispersule weight, and not seed weight, dispersal vector or Ellenberg’s indicator values, was the trait that differentiated F species from G species. We conclude that most woody corridors are only dispersal stepping-stone habitats for habitat generalist species, and not for specialists. Only century old corridors can relieve the dispersal limitation of forest-restricted species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f51a122b3e4589a375b5df9ff449a652> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Longer-term environmental studies are increasingly used to better understand contemporary ecosystems conditions and for forecasting their future trajectories. Here, we use radiometric measurements and the characterisation of sediment properties from six mountain and a lowland lake in Central Eastern Europe with the aim to assess temporal and spatial variability in sediment accumulation rates (SARs) in relation to three socio-economic regimes: traditional (1840–1948), socialist (1948–1989) and post-socialist (post-1990). We also set out to determine reference conditions for these lakes i.e. conditions before significant human impact. Our results show a trend of increasing SARs from basal sediments (pre 1840) towards the present at only two sites. This contrasts with findings from Western and Central European lakes where SARs have predominantly increased from 1850 towards the top of cores. We highlight the differential impacts of the traditional, socialist and post-socialist periods on the SARs at these lakes. Lowland and mid-elevations lakes (n = 2) were most markedly impacted by the socialist period of land use regime; lakes from the southern Carpathians (n = 2) were more impacted in the traditional period (transhumance pastoral activities), whereas those from the north (n = 3) in the socialist and post-socialist periods (summer pastoralism). Results from our study show a continuous anthropogenic impact during the entire period considered, even in remote mountain areas. This suggests that a temporal frame of 100–150 years is too short to meaningfully register the reference conditions of these lakes. Furthermore, a predominantly natural state may not have existed for centuries in this region." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d0ba45017148591fa36ec4c7db4e6d23> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary In order to find a method for measuring field metabolism of worker ants the elimination of134Cs by two ant species has been investigated. Equations relating temperature to radiocaesium elimination and metabolism have been found. From these equations the relationship between elimination and metabolism is calculated. Consequently, the elimination of the isotope can be used for measuring metabolism. A pilot field experiment withLasius alienus (Först.) reveals that the traditional methods of estimating field metabolism give values which are considerably lower than the value based on caesium elimination rate. This difference is supposed to be mainly due to greater motor activity of the animals in the field. Consequently, the value of the caesium elimination methods is closer to the “true” value of field metabolism." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/de9afe3dd3d659ad15e0f9265aba8fbb> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Myrmecophytic symbioses are widespread in tropical ecosystems and their diversity makes them useful tools for understanding the origin and evolution of mutualisms. Obligate ant–plants, or myrmecophytes, provide a nesting place, and, often, food to a limited number of plant–ant species. In exchange, plant–ants protect their host plants from herbivores, competitors and pathogens, and can provide them with nutrients. Although most studies to date have highlighted a similar global pattern of interactions in these systems, little is known about the temporal structuring and dynamics of most of these associations. In this study we focused on the association between the understory myrmecophyte Hirtella physophora (Chrysobalanaceae) and its obligate ant partner Allomerus decemarticulatus (Myrmicinae). An examination of the life histories and growth rates of both partners demonstrated that this plant species has a much longer lifespan (up to about 350 years) than its associated ant colonies (up to about 21 years). The size of the ant colonies and their reproductive success were strongly limited by the available nesting space provided by the host plants. Moreover, the resident ants positively affected the vegetative growth of their host plant, but had a negative effect on its reproduction by reducing the number of flowers and fruits by more than 50%. Altogether our results are important to understanding the evolutionary dynamics of ant–plant symbioses. The highly specialized interaction between long-lived plants and ants with a shorter lifespan produces an asymmetry in the evolutionary rates of the interaction which, in return, can affect the degree to which the interests of the two partners converge." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/691b224c5cb67f2e8d55534ade963d31> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Various studies have shown that the Asian fish tapeworm, Bothriocephalus acheilognathi causes great economic loss in hatcheries, fish farms as well as in lakes. In order to understand the seasonal variation of infection in a nutrient-enriched lake, parasitological investigation was carried out in the indigenous cyprinid fish, Schizothorax niger Heckel 1838 from September, 2008 to August, 2009. Overall, this study revealed definite seasonality of infection (p < 0.05), with greater infection in summer (prevalence = 39.5%) and lesser in winter (prevalence = 8.1%). The prevalence among different seasons revealed significant differences (p < 0.05). Sex was not an important factor influencing the prevalence of the Asian tapeworm. A strong positive correlation (Pearson’s correlation, r = 0.7; p = 0.02) between total length of S. niger and number of Asian fish tapeworms was observed. Similarly, a strong positive correlation existed between weight of fish and number of tapeworms (Pearson’s correlation, r = 0.7; p = 0.005). Prevalence and mean abundance were positively and significantly correlated with water temperature (r = 0.8, p < 0.01 and r = 0.8, p < 0.01, respectively). Thus seasonal dynamics, total length and weight of the host significantly influenced the tapeworm infection. The above findings will be useful in devising the appropriate control strategies for the Asian tapeworm in wild fish in Kashmir valley as well as in similar climatic zones of other parts of the world. Also, information from this study will be used to assess the spread and extent of B. acheilognathi which is a potential threat to the indigenous fish fauna of Anchar Lake." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/4b3037c6df567d77934621698964df6f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary In an effort to make complex food web relations more tractable, published data on the food habits of terrestrial vertebrate predators were analyzed for patterns in the use of prey by size. Regressions of prey weight on predator weight were run and provided descriptions of both the relationship between mean prey weight and predator weight and the variation in prey weights taken by the predators. Separate models proved necessary for three trophic specializations: insectivores, piscivores and carnivores. Insectivores were found to take proportionately much smaller prey than carnivores. Mean prey weight tends to decrease slightly relative to predator weight among larger insectivores, while the ratio of prey weight to predator weight tends to increase with carnivore size. On average, insectivores also take a relatively wider range, of prey sizes than carnivores. In all respects, piscivores were intermediate to insectivores and carnivores. These models produce log-normal approximations to the frequency distributions (by weight) of prey sizes in the ration of predators from knowledge of the predators's body mass. Combined with allometric models of the bionergetics and productivity of animals, these relations are used to predict, that: (1) the daily kill rate declines with predator weight and (2) the upper limit to predator biomass is independent of predator weight." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/acf71f8c35450cd08406cfff8d42f620> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Animal body size is driven by habitat quality, food availability, and nutrition. Adult size can relate to birth weight, to length of the ontogenetic growth period, and/or to the rate of growth. Data requirements are high for studying these growth mechanisms, but large datasets exist for some game species. In North America, large harvest datasets exist for white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), but such data are collected under a variety of conditions and are generally dismissed for ecological research beyond local population and habitat management. We contend that such data are useful for studying the ecology of white-tailed deer growth and body size when analyzed at ordinal scale. In this paper, we test the response of growth rate to food availability by fitting a logarithmic equation that estimates growth rate only to harvest data from Fort Hood, Texas, and track changes in growth rate over time. Results of this ordinal scale model are compared to previously published models that include additional parameters, such as birth weight and adult weight. It is shown that body size responds to food availability by variation in growth rate. Models that estimate multiple parameters may not work with harvest data because they are prone to error, which renders estimates from complex models too variable to detect interannual changes in growth rate that this ordinal scale model captures. This model can be applied to harvest data, from which inferences about factors that influence animal growth and body size (e.g., habitat quality and nutritional availability) can be drawn." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/3dfb6a3be67048813e6e47d38a4314b1> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary: Caste ratio theory predicts that polymorphic ant colonies should be able to alter the ratio of worker sizes in response to changing environmental demands. We selected a common dimorphic species, Pheidole flavens, for a field manipulation to test whether caste allocation will change in response to food supplementation. We collected, without replacement, control and treatment colonies from 1 m2 plots over a period of four months. Food was added to treatment plots every other day in either of two spatial presentations: clumped and split. Clumped food treatments received food in a single location in the center of the plot, while the split food treatments were spread throughout the plot area. To test how P. flavens responded to food supplementation, we compared the number of soldier pupae between control and treatment plots, as well as the ratio of adult soldiers to adult minor workers. We found a generalized increase in the number of soldier pupae produced within the treatment plots, which was not correlated with the duration of the treatment period. As the manipulation progressed, the ratio of soldiers to minor workers increased in the clumped food plots. The possible mechanisms for altered caste ratios include the absence of soldiers from their nests, increased frequency of interactions with competitors, and a change in the type of foods collected from the environment. The discovery that food resources can affect how ant colonies determine the ratio of sterile workers suggests that ants may change caste ratio in response to a number of environmental variables." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/88f9ab97add6e1b6d3ae7b386a466063> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Elaiosomes attract rodent predators, as well as ant dispersers (Myrmica discontinua and Formica podzolica), to Viola nuttallii seeds. Seed removal by ants and rodents was studied over 24 h and over two separate 4-h periods. Experimental treatments included i) ants and rodents having access to seeds, ii) only ants having access, iii) only rodents having access, and iv) neither ants nor rodents having access. Seed dehiscence was monitored for 3 days. A simple model is used to determine the relative importance of ants and rodents in removing seeds, and these frequencies are related to the time when most seeds were released. The data show that most seeds are shed from capsules between 9 AM and 1 PM and are immediately removed by ants. Ants, on the average, remove 88% of the seeds. The timing of seed dehiscence increases the probability of seeds being dispersed by ants. The results are discussed with respect to the hypothesis that a sychrony of the time of seed dispersal and the period when most ants (mutualists) and least rodents (predators) are active would be advantageous to the plant species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9c5fbabef9c069e0f4a9041df7457c80> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Cyanobacterial blooms-produced microcystins are secondary metabolites which can accumulate in the food chain and contaminate water, thus posing a potential threat to the health of aquatic animals and even humans. Microcystin toxicity affects not only the liver but also the other organs, i.e., the brain. The serious neurotoxicity effects caused by microcystins then lead to various symptoms. This review focuses on the neurotoxicity of microcystins. Microcystins can cross blood-brain barrier with the transport of Oatps/OATPs, causing neurostructural, functional, and behavioral changes. In this review, potential uptake mechanisms and neurotoxicity mechanisms are summarized, including neurotransmissions, neurochannels, signal transduction, oxidative stress, and cytoskeleton disruption. However, further researches are needed for detailed studies on signaling pathways and the downstream pathways of neurotoxicity of microcystins." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9fa453f08d9c539306467f3d9b1ab1a9> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Specific structural features of absorbing roots have been studied in Acer negundo (an invasive species in the southern Cisural region), compared to native Acer platanoides and A. tataricum. A comparative analysis of the diameter of fine roots, stele and bark volumes, and the frequencies of roots with retained primary bark, root hairs, arbuscular mycorrhiza, and dark septate endophytes has been performed in the invasive and native species from four habitats (by two habitats in the forest–steppe and steppe zones). The roots of A. negundo have been additionally studied in trees from two monospecific stands. It has been found that the structure of fine roots significantly differs between the invasive and native species: the roots of A. negundo are larger, with relatively poorly developed root hairs and low occurrence of dark septate endophytes. In monospecific stands, the frequency of mycorrhiza in A. negundo roots is very low, with arbuscules and dark septate endophytes being totally absent. It is concluded that specific structural features of the belowground absorbing apparatus in A. negundo are accounted for mainly by traits autonomously formed in a plant, rather than by characteristics of symbiotic relationships, and that they are not consistent with the assumption that the invasive species can utilize soil resources more effectively or more rapidly than taxonomically close native species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f7fef86fda18f6eeb2745f8a24c07e69> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Geomorphology, vegetation and tidal fluxes are usually identified as the factors introducing variation in the flushing of particulate organic matter (POM) from tidal marshes to adjacent waters. Such variables may, however, be insufficient to explain export characteristics in marshes inhabited by ecosystem engineers that can alter the quantity and quality of POM on the marsh surface that is subject to tidal flushing. In this study we evaluated the balance between transfer of buried sedimentary organic carbon (C) to the marsh surface due to crab excavation (measured from the mounds of sediment excavated from burrows) and outputs of C from the surface due to sediment deposition within crab burrows (estimated from sediment deposited within PVC burrow mimics), in a Southwestern Atlantic salt marsh supporting dense (approximately 70 ind m−2) populations of the crab Chasmagnathus granulatus. C excavation by crabs was much greater than deposition of C within crab burrow mimics. Per area unit estimates of the balance between these two processes indicated that crabs excavated 5.98 g m−2 d−1 and 4.80 mg m−2 d−1 of total and readily (10 d) labile C, respectively. However, sediments excavated by crabs showed a significantly lower content of both total and readily-labile C than sediment collected in burrow mimics. This indicates that ecosystem engineering by burrowing crabs causes a net decrease in the concentration of C in the superficial sediment layers and, thus, an overall decrease in the amount of C that can be washed out of the marsh by tidal action. Incorporating the in situ activities of ecosystem engineers in models of marsh export should enhance understanding of the function of marshes in estuarine ecosystems." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b7289c8392003316e09e1c170559ead6> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary The effects of swarm size on colony growth and worker weight were examined in honey bee (A. mellifera) colonies founded by swarms. A significant positive correlation was found between swarm size and both brood production and emergent worker weight, but the swarm size and the ratio of brood to workers were not correlated. This differs from previous studies involving managed colonies where brood/worker ratios were negatively correlated with colony size. Also, cell size did not vary according to colony age or population. New colonies founded by small swarms are limited in the weight and number of workers which they can produce, likely due to poor nutrition caused by a lack of workers to perform nurse and foraging tasks." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/caea4e86bf94944a1396209ea0d53edf> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Large habitat fragments are generally thought to host more species and to offer more diverse and/or better quality habitats than small fragments. However, the importance of small fragments for population dynamics in general and for reproductive performance in particular is highly controversial. Using an information-theoretic approach, we examined reproductive performance and probability of local recruitment of color-banded reed buntings Emberiza schoeniclus in relation to the size of 18 wetland fragments in northeastern Switzerland over 4 years. We also investigated if reproductive performance and recruitment probability were density-dependent. None of the four measures of reproductive performance (laying date, nest failure probability, fledgling production per territory, fledgling condition) nor recruitment probability were found to be related to wetland fragment size. In terms of fledgling production, however, fragment size interacted with year, indicating that small fragments were better reproductive grounds in some years than large fragments. Reproductive performance and recruitment probability were not density-dependent. Our results suggest that small fragments are equally suited as breeding grounds for the reed bunting as large fragments and should therefore be managed to provide a habitat for this and other specialists occurring in the same habitat. Moreover, large fragments may represent sinks in specific years because a substantial percentage of all breeding pairs in our study area breed in large fragments, and reproductive failure in these fragments due to the regularly occurring floods may have a much stronger impact on regional population dynamics than comparable events in small fragments." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/9f74f70d6705c3a21b79c44cc353112e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary In a previous study (A. Prejs and K. Prejs in press) we found that at the end of the dry season small fish species trapped together with piscivorous fish in small, shallow pool varied in their level of food intake. The two smallest of these species fed little, whereas larger species fed at high rate. By examining the species and size composition of the diet and gape limitations of predatory species, I found that the decreased feeding rate of small fish was in response to a high risk of predation by gape-limited predators. The reduction of feeding rate was very substantial when compared to that of the same species in predator free area." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/216e2fcb0186f1de93ff3a273d19be2d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary We investigated effects of seed density, distance from parent, and habitat (woods, open field) on post-dispersal predation risk (chiefly by rodents) for seeds of Prunus virginiana (Rosaceae). Additional study of the habitat effect (woods, open field, treefall gap) was made with seeds of Prunus avium (Rosaceae) and Uvularia grandiflora (Liliaceae). Density of Prunus seeds (range 2–40 seeds/group) did not affect predation risk for individual seeds. Distance from parent plants did influence predation risk, which was greatest directly beneath parents. This distance effect primarily comprised a sharp drop in risk within 2 m of parents, a distance too small to generate a “spacing rule” for conspecifics. We found that habitat strongly influenced predation intensity. Rates of removal of Prunus seeds were higher in woods than in open fields, except when overall predation intensity was very low and no pattern could be discerned. Prunus seed removal rates were higher in closed woods than in treefall gaps. Consequently, a Prunus seed will more likely escape predation if dispersed to an open site. In contrast, Uvularia seed removal rates were higher in open fields than in woods but did not differ between closed woods and tree-fall gaps. Predation intensity was spatially patchy between and within experimental arrays, but was consistent over time at some specific points in space, possibly reflecting home ranges of seed predators." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/0a064356e05c6411fc4f400075639b0a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The prey choice model, previously applied among shellfish gatherers in Kiribati, Micronesia, has shown that they are foraging in a manner that matches the predictions of optimal foraging theory by maximizing their net energy return rates. Similar conclusions can be drawn subsequent to testing the patch choice model, including patch switching; patch sampling; and the analysis of risk. In light of these results, it is argued that natural selection probably never encouraged the persistence of conservation because individuals have nearly always benefited from short-term goals to ensure greater fitness. However, the possibility remains that as a result of changed circumstances brought about by increasing human population, more efficient extractive technologies, and expanding market opportunities, genuine, as opposed to epiphenomenal conservation, may become established in heavily impacted environments." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/39fe0d7f233d5752912966a687a413b7> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The global decline in biodiversity is causing increasing concern about the effects of biodiversity loss on ecosystem services such as productivity. Biodiversity has been hypothesised to be important in maintaining productivity of biological assemblages because niche complementarity and facilitation among the constituent species can result in more efficient use of resources. However, these conclusions are primarily based on studies with plant communities, and the relationship between diversity and productivity at higher trophic levels is largely unknown, especially in the marine environment. Here, we used a manipulative field experiment to test the effects of species richness and species identity on biomass accumulation in coral reef fish assemblages at Lizard Island. Small patch reefs were stocked with a total of 30 juveniles belonging to three planktivorous damselfish (genus Pomacentrus) according to three different levels of fish species richness (one, two and three species) and seven different combinations of fish species. Species richness had no effect on the relative growth in this assemblage after 18 days, but relative growth differed among individual fish species and the different combinations of species. Patterns of increase in biomass were best explained by species-specific differences and variable effects of intra- and interspecific competition on growth. These results suggest that niche complementarity and facilitation are not the most influential drivers of total productivity within this guild of planktivorous fishes. Total productivity may be resilient to declining reef fish biodiversity, but this will depend on which species are lost and on the life-history traits of remaining species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ec8494b34ae3487f196ace0efcb206f4> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Background insect herbivory, in addition to insect outbreaks, can have an important long term influence on the performance of tree species. Since a projected warmer climate may favour insect herbivores, we use a dynamic ecosystem model to investigate the impacts of background herbivory on vegetation growth and productivity, as well as distribution and associated changes in terrestrial ecosystems of northern Europe. We used the GUESS ecosystem modelling framework and a simple linear model for including the leaf area loss of Betula pubescens in relation to mean July temperature. We tested the sensitivity of the responses of the simulated ecosystems to different, but realistic, degrees of insect damage. Predicted temperature increases are likely to enhance the potential insect impacts on vegetation. The impacts are strongest in the eastern areas, where potential insect damage to B. pubescens can increase by 4–5%. The increase in insect damage to B. pubescens results in a reduction of total birch leaf area (LAI), total birch biomass and birch productivity (Net Primary Production). This effect is stronger than the insect damage to leaf area alone would suggest, due to its second order effect on the competition between tree species. The model's demonstration that background herbivory may cause changes in vegetation structure suggests that insect damage, generally neglected by vegetation models, can change predictions of future forest composition. Carbon fluxes and albedo are only slightly influenced by background insect herbivory, indicating that background insect damage is of minor importance for estimating the feedback of terrestrial ecosystems to climate change." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b20f1ae895cafe50d9be67becf1e9e6e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Horticulture is one of the most important pathways for plant invasion. We used microsatellite markers to reveal the impact of plant breeding on Mahonia aquifolium, an invasive ornamental shrub. Since it was bred by hybridization with the related species M. repens and M. pinnata, we compared populations of the three native species, various commercial cultivars and invasive populations. Invasive populations and cultivars were genetically differentiated from the native groups, but differences did not result from genetic bottlenecks. In cultivars but not in invasive populations, we proved genes from M. pinnata. No significant amount of M. repens genes were found in cultivars and invasive populations, but this result has to be viewed with caution because of the close relationship between native M. aquifolium and M. repens. We conclude that the evolution of invasive Mahonia populations was a result of restriction of gene pool during introduction, secondary release, and artificial selection, in combination with an increase of genetic diversity by plant breeders and by extensive gene flow." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b4046bc26dc77b9b9154545f5beaadab> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The fish fauna of the Southern Ocean is dominated by species of the perciform suborder Notothenioidei, which constitute 46% of fish species and 90% of biomass. Notothenioids have undergone rapid morphological and ecological diversification and developed physiological adaptations to a cold, highly oxygenated environment. Microbes inhabiting animal intestines include those that perform essential nutritional functions, but notothenioid gut microbial communities have not been investigated using cultivation-independent approaches. We analyzed bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequences obtained from the intestinal tract of Notothenia coriiceps and Chaenocephalus aceratus, which differ in their pelagic distribution and feeding strategies. Both samples showed dominance of Gammaproteobacteria (mostly Vibrionaceae), as has been reported for temperate teleost species. Both samples showed low diversity relative to that reported for other fish microbiota studies, with C. aceratus containing fewer OTUs than N. coriiceps. Despite the small sample size of this preliminary study, our findings suggest that Antarctic notothenioids carry a gut microbiota similar in composition to that of temperate fish, but exhibiting lower species-level diversity. The omnivorous N. coriiceps individual exhibited greater diversity than the exclusively carnivorous C. aceratus individual, which may indicate that increasing herbivory in fish leads to gut microbe diversification, as found in mammals. Lastly, we detected members of taxa containing known microbial pathogens, which have not been previously reported in Antarctic notothenioid fish." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/27fc06950348d22ff1b11bc41c52ae4f> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The question whether total population energy use is invariant to species body size (the energy equivalence hypothesis) is central to metabolic ecology and continues to be controversial. While recent comparative field work and meta-analyses pointed to systematic deviations of the underlying allometric scaling laws from predictions of metabolic theory none of these studies included the variability of metabolic scaling in ecological time. Here we used extensive data on the invertebrate soil fauna of Kampinos National Park (Poland) obtained from six consecutive quantitative sampling seasons to show that phylogenetically corrected species density—body weight and population energy use—body weight relationships across all soil fauna species and within trophic groups and body weight classes were highly variable in time. On average, population energy use tended to increase with species body weight in decomposers and phytophages, but not in predators. Despite these trends, our data do not exclude the possibility that energy equivalence marks the central tendency of energy use in the edaphon. Our results highlight the need for long-term studies on energy use to unequivocally assess predictions of metabolic theory." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/f697685487be26c7acbb55bd5667a270> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Biotic homogenization has been reported worldwide. Although simplification of communities across space is often significant at larger scales, it could also occur at the local scale by changing biotic interactions. This study aimed to elucidate local community processes driving biotic homogenization of soil faunal communities, and the possibility of biotic re-differentiation. We recorded species of oribatid mites in litter and soil layers along a gradient of forest conversion from monoculture larch plantation to primary forests in central Japan. We collected data for functional traits of the recorded species to quantify functional diversity. Then we quantified their taxonomic/functional turnover. Litter diversity was reduced in the larch-dominated stands, leading to habitat homogenization. Consequently, litter communities were biologically homogenized and differentiated in the plantations and in the natural forest, respectively. Turnover of functional traits for litter communities was lower and higher than expected by chance in the plantations and in the natural stand, respectively. This result suggests that the dominant assembly process shifts from limiting similarity to habitat filtering along the forest restoration gradient. However, support for such niche-based explanations was not observed for communities in the soil layer. In the monocultures, functional diversity expected from a given regional species pool significantly decreased for litter communities but not for those in the soil layer. Such discrepancy between communities in different layers suggests that communities more exposed to anthropogenic stresses are more vulnerable to the loss of their functional roles. Our study explains possible community processes behind the observed patterns of biological organization, which can be potentially useful in guiding approaches for restoring biodiversity." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/be28429dcc57605bfa5da7a0946d654c> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Many diurnal planktivorous fish in coral reefs efficiently consume zooplankton drifting in the overlying water column. Our survey, carried out at two coral reefs in the Red Sea, showed that most of the diurnal planktivorous fish foraged near the bottom, close to the shelters from piscivores. The planktivorous fish were order of magnitude more abundant near (<1.5 m) the bottom than higher in the water column. The predation pressure exerted by these fish was assessed by measuring the consumption of brine shrimps tethered at different heights above the bottom on a vertical line which was pulled over the reef. Below 1.5 m above bottom, the shrimps’ survival probability sharply decreased toward the bottom. Higher in the water column, survivorship was nearly 100% with little vertical variation. Our results indicate that near-bottom depletion of zooplankton in coral reefs is likely due to intense predation at that boundary layer. Risk of predation by piscivorous fish apparently restricts planktivorous fish to forage near the bottom, with a distribution pattern greatly deviating from ideal-free distribution." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/560f67d4779e3597b9856f5692246164> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Insect dynamics depend on temperature patterns, and therefore, global warming may lead to increasing frequencies and intensities of insect outbreaks. The aim of this work was to analyze the dynamics of the olive fruit fly, Bactrocera oleae (Rossi), in Tuscany (Italy). We profited from long-term records of insect infestation and weather data available from the regional database and agrometeorological network. We tested whether the analysis of 13 years of monitoring campaigns can be used as basis for prediction models of B. oleae infestation. We related the percentage of infestation observed in the first part of the host-pest interaction and throughout the whole year to agrometeorological indices formulated for different time periods. A two-step approach was adopted to inspect the effect of weather on infestation: generalized linear model with a binomial error distribution and principal component regression to reduce the number of the agrometeorological factors and remove their collinearity. We found a consistent relationship between the degree of infestation and the temperature-based indices calculated for the previous period. The relationship was stronger with the minimum temperature of winter season. Higher infestation was observed in years following warmer winters. The temperature of the previous winter and spring explained 66 % of variance of early-season infestation. The temperature of previous winter and spring, and current summer, explained 72 % of variance of total annual infestation. These results highlight the importance of multiannual monitoring activity to fully understand the dynamics of B. oleae populations at a regional scale." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/fd8ed55676b394211593ec70d20fcd1a> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The present study is based on simultaneous measurements of the atmospheric electric potential gradient (PG) and Schumann resonances at Nagycenk station (Hungary) from 1993 to 1996. Annual and semiannual variations detected previously in the relative amplitudes of Schumann resonances (SR) in the first three modes are confirmed by the extended data series applied here. The regular annual variation found in the PG (with winter maximum and summer minimum) is in the opposite phase, compared to that of the SR amplitudes. Nevertheless, even the PG (being a parameter of the DC global circuit) occasionally shows a distinct secondary peak in summer as indicated by the results of the present analysis (and corresponding to a recent study on further parameters of the DC global circuit). In spite of the presumed dominance of local influence over the global one, a suitable PG parameter correlates well with SR (representing the AC global circuit) on the annual time scale. It also became evident that a semiannual variation (with spring and autumn maxima and winter and summer minima) is generally present in SR. Certain signatures of a semiannual variation have also been revealed in the PG, however, the phase of this semiannual variation does not fit the pattern shown by SR (and tropical surface air temperature, respectively). The representativeness of the PG data has also been checked by means of a single day’s diurnal variations displaying a phase corresponding to that of the ‘Carnegie Curve’. Additionally, the coincidence of short-term changes (lasting some hours) both in the SR and the PG parameter is also demonstrated on a day disturbed by local factors. The results are discussed in the context of correlations between surface air temperature and parameters of the atmospheric electric global circuit shown by previous studies." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/b2b525b7cb00803c1fe606f79789188d> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Simulation models have recently been used to suggest that spatial heterogeneity, acting on small spatial scales within local populations, may allow parasitoids and other natural enemies to “regulate” host or prey populations in ways that would not be detected by conventional (k-factor) analyses of life table data. However, additional study of these models suggests that local extinction may be a frequent event in the simulated interactions. The “spreading of risk” concept appears more applicable to the simulated populations than a classical view emphasizing tight regulation around stable equilibrium points. The spreading of risk viewpoint also appears to shed additional light on questions raised in the recent debate between Dempster (1983); Hassel (1985); Dempster and Pollard (1986), concerning the modeling of spatial heterogeneity and “regulation” in temperate-zone insect populations." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/3f14e6349bbb7184bb1461cdaa1172b7> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract. Macroecology is an emerging subdiscipline within ecology that explores effects of large-scale processes on local, regional, and global patterns of species diversity and taxon-independent scaling of structural and functional relationships. Statistical analysis of these patterns yields hypotheses concerning the processes determining population, community, and ecosystem-level patterns, which have been the historical focus of most ecological research, including that done in mangroves. The majority of studies of mangrove forests have aimed to better understand the causes of local (within-forest) ecological patterns (e.g. zonation, tolerance to salinity and hypoxia, litterfall and production), with little attention to the larger environmental, historical and evolutionary contexts that can influence local processes. I argue that a focus on the larger-scale contexts that constrain local processes (a \"macroecology of mangroves\") will provide us with new insights into the structure and function of mangrove ecosystems. Further, such analyses can be used to determine if mangroves follow similar general rules that have been identified for upland forested ecosystems. I consider two examples: relationships between local species richness and latitude, longitude and regional diversity; and structural coordination of leaf traits. I present data and analyses of these macroecological patterns in mangrove forests, and illustrate points of agreement and disagreement between these and upland ecosystems. I suggest that ecological theory developed in upland forests can be readily applied to mangrove forests. Such a conclusion should lead to advances in ecological research of mangroves and better predictions of how they will respond to global climate change." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/91a3e0f40830fdbb1408fbd269fbf8a9> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Harmful algal blooms occur throughout the world, destroying aquatic ecosystems and threatening human health. The culture supernatant of the marine algicidal bacteria DHQ25 was able to lysis dinoflagellate Alexandrium tamarense. Loss of photosynthetic pigments, accompanied by a decline in Photosystem II (PSII) photochemical efficiency (Fv/Fm), in A. tamarense was detected under bacterial supernatant stress. Transmission electron microscope analysis showed obvious morphological modifications of chloroplast dismantling as a part of the algicidal process. The PSII electron transport chain was seriously blocked, with its reaction center damaged. This damage was detected in a relative transcriptional level of psbA and psbD genes, which encode the D1 and D2 proteins in the PSII reaction center. And the block in the electron transport chain of PSII might generate excessive reactive oxygen species (ROS) which could destroy the membrane system and pigment synthesis and activated enzymic antioxidant systems including superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT). This study indicated that marine bacteria with indirect algicidal activity played an important role in the changes of photosynthetic process in a harmful algal bloom species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/fa32cdaf4ba75afec6ece6263401ce4e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The viviparous freshwater gastropod Tylomelania (Caenogastropoda: Cerithioidea: Pachychilidae) endemic to the Indonesian island Sulawesi has radiated extensively in two ancient lake systems. We here present the first systematic species-level review of taxa in the five lakes of the Malili lake system, which contains the most diverse and best studied freshwater fauna on Sulawesi. Our results indicate a significantly higher diversity of Tylomelania in these lakes than previously perceived based on morphological evidence for delimiting the taxa. We describe nine new species, thus increasing the number of taxa known from the Malili lakes to 25. Tylomelania species are inhabiting all available substrates in the lakes, and the diversity of habitats is reflected in an unparalleled range of radula types in this closely related group. Several species show a high intraspecific variability in some characters, and their closer investigation will probably lead to the discovery of more cryptic species. As it is, this species flock on Sulawesi is among the largest freshwater mollusc radiations known. Since the Malili lake system also contains other large endemic species flocks of e.g. crustaceans and fishes, it is a major hotspot of freshwater biodiversity in Asia to become a conservation priority." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/ad84700ee8ccb46798634357a69cbc14> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Ten seedlings each of Eucalyptus kitsoniana Maiden and Eucalyptus globulus Labill. were subjected to two levels of water stress and two levels of nutrient stress (macro and micro-nutrients) in a greenhouse for 3 weeks. The objectives were to determine the degree to which seedlings show differences in sap chemistry, photosynthesis and transpiration that relate to the environments in which these two species live. Whole plants were then extracted for xylem sap using a pressure chamber and the sap was analyzed for 14 elements using an inductively coupled plasma spectrometer and a nitrometer. For E. kitsoniana water and nutrient stress, applied separately or in combination, significantly reduced leaf conductance, transpiration, photosynthesis and midday water potential. Nutrient stress alone had less effect than water stress on most functions measured. Water stress alone reduced the root/shoot ratio; the combination of water and nutrient stress increased the root/shoot ratio, primarily because of reduced shoot weight. In E. kitsoniana, water stress alone or in combination with nutrient stress increased the xylem sap concentrations of B and Si. Multi-nutrient stress alone, or in combination with water stress, significantly decreased sap Zn and K. For this species, sap N was decreased by nutrient stress, but increased by water stress. E. globulus had significantly lower transpiration rates and less root mass than E. kitsoniana. Slightly lower leaf conductance and photosynthesis were not significant in E. globulus compared to E. kitsoniana. Water and nutrient stress reduced conductance, transpiration (except for nutrient stress) and photosynthesis, and the effects of water stress on E. globulus were greater than the effects of nutrient stress. Midday water potential was reduced by water stress. Water or nutrient stress alone did not alter seedling root/shoot ratio, but the combination of water and nutrient stress significantly increased the root/shoot ratio for both species. For E. globulus, sap concentrations of Mn, Na, Si and K were increased by water stress (alone or in combination with nutrient stress). Sap N increased with water stress or combined stresses, but decreased under nutrient stress alone. When the two species were compared, E. globulus generally had lower or similar nutrient concentrations in the sap, with Ca, Mg, Mn and P significantly lower than in E. kitsoniana. Seedlings of these two species show strong site adaptations to water and nutrient availability." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/599efc7186a1c77eca4ef011fe73c3ad> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract A description of the water quality in Lake Kinneret watershed is given Water of high quality is supplied by the Jordan tributaries. Suspended matter and soluble components are introduced into the water along the intensively cultivated Hula valley. The suspended matter introduced is very high in organic matter and nutrients. A partial purification of the water occurs downstream, in the Jordan canyon. The nutrient contents in the river are highly correlated with the suspended load." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a0337d61c61feb0969772230a214c3f1> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Summary Three high marsh communities on the Chesapeake Bay were exposed to a doubling in ambient CO2 concentration for one growing season. Open-top chambers were used to raise CO2 concentrations ca. 340 ppm above ambient over monospecific communities of Scirpus olneyi (C3) and Spartina patens (C4), and a mixed community of S. olneyi, S. patens, and Distichlis spicata (C4). Plant growth and senescence were monitored by serial, nondestructive censuses. Elevated CO2 resulted in increased shoot densities and delayed sensecence in the C3 species. This resulted in an increase in primary productivity in S. olneyi growing in both the pure and mixed communities. There was no effect of CO2 on growth in the C4 species. These results demonstrate that elevated atmospheric CO2 can cause increased aboveground production in a mature, unmanaged ecosystem." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/2bc83bb51303570a54993b402f7e1b81> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Two freshwater ponds were studied periodically from April 1970 to January 1971. Both ponds, one permanent (pond 1) and the other temporary (pond 2) are located on the western Maryland shore of upper Chesapeake Bay. The temporary pond became dry in mid-September and remained so until late november. Free carbon dioxide, dissolved oxygen, and hardness fluctuated irregularly throughout the study. In August the pH in the permanent pond decreased greatly with little subsequent recovery. After pond 2 again contained water, hardness increased to over 400% of values before drying. Lists of aquatic flowering plants were prepared for both ponds. Each pond contained a distinct assemblage of zooplankters probably influenced by the amount of aquatic vegetation present. Total zooplankton species numbers in each pond were almost equal, but the temporary pond contained greater quantities of zooplankton. Two generations per year ofD. sanguineus were found in pond 2. Eubranchipus vernalis (Verrill) andE. holmani (Ryder) were found in December in pond 2; the general life cycle of these anostracans is briefly outlined. A congeneric occurrence of two calanoid copepodsDiaptomus birgei Marsh andD. sanguineus Forbes was found in May in temporary pond 2. Both are of the same subgenus (Onychodiaptomus Light). Various causes and mechanisms explaining congeneric occurrences are briefly reviewed. Slight size differences, insufficient time due to several factors discussed for competitive exclusion to operate to completion, and partial seasonal separation appear to best explain the present co-occurrence." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/bb104635f64c5add7bd0a43f3c0fa9ae> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract In order to anticipate the ecological impacts of climate change and model changes to forests, it is important to understand the factors controlling spring leaf out. Leaf out phenology in woody trees and shrubs is generally considered to be strongly controlled by a combination of spring warming, winter chilling requirement, and photoperiod. However, researchers have recently suggested that temperature-related air humidity, rather than temperature itself, might be the main trigger of the spring leaf-out of woody plants. Here, we sought to examine the relationship between air humidity and leaf-out across a range of humidities and plant functional groups. We did not find any consistent, measurable effect of high humidity advancing leaf-out in the 15 woody shrubs and trees examined in this study, and we did not see progressive patterns of earlier leaf-out in successively higher humidities. Our results indicate that more work must be done on this topic before researchers can properly determine the effect of humidity on the leafing out process for woody species." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/a66f3318d1a76a551930e5d9da6d68b8> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Hybridization between loblolly pine and shortleaf pine has been shown in sympatric and allopatric portions of the species native ranges. In this study, we used 25 microsatellite markers to determine the hybrid status of 165 and 151 loblolly pine and shortleaf pine trees sampled across their ranges, respectively, and to estimate population differentiation within these species. Estimated differentiation (Φ PT) for these current-day samples was significantly higher in both species—0.115 in loblolly pine and 0.146 in shortleaf pine—than for trees planted from seed collected from the same locations in the 1950s. These increases are likely due to anthropogenic causes such as habitat fragmentation. In addition, the proportion of hybrids rose dramatically in both species: 27.3% hybrids in loblolly pine populations and 46.7% hybrids in shortleaf pine populations compared to rates of 4.5% and 3.3%, respectively, in the 1950s populations. Our results suggest that shortleaf pine and remnant naturally regenerated loblolly pine are at risk." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/1b7ed0c4ae579a71d0361bd7ade7683e> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Pinus species show remarkable ontogenetic differences in needle morphology (heterophylly) between juvenile and adult vegetative phases. This developmental shift may play an adaptative role in their success under diverse habitats. As a first step to know the functional differences between each vegetative phase, we compared water loss through the cuticles of juvenile and adult needles of 21-month-old nursery-grown seedlings of nine hard pine species. Cuticular transpiration (CT), calculated after complete stomatal closure, was obtained by leaf-drying curves, and was related to leaf, ontogenetic and climatic parameters. The rate of cuticular transpiration (RCT) between juvenile and adult needles differed across pine species, and in particular segregated the Mediterranean species Pinus canariensis and P. halepensis, from the Eurasian P. uncinata and introduced species P. radiata. For these species, RCT was always higher in juvenile needles. The different leaf and ontogenic parameters studied were correlated with the variation in RCT among the nine pine species. We discuss this relationship in the light of the species ecology. Besides their possible adaptive interpretation, these results suggest an underlying need to consider the ontogenetic heterophylly when assessing functional traits in hard pine seedlings, in particular those traits that govern water relations." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/eab141ca29393f8fb540c0b0396d9557> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Biofilms play a fundamental ecological role in freshwater ecosystems as they contribute to ecosystem function(s) such as autotrophic primary production, organic matter decomposition and the bottom-up directed energy transfer in the food web. The present focused review summarizes the scientific knowledge on how the roles of autotrophic and heterotrophic biofilms can be modulated as a response to chemical (i.e., pesticide) stress. We discuss how horizontal effects (alterations in the structure of biofilms) can affect the physiological fitness and life history strategy of the next trophic level (vertical effects), namely primary consumers. Since the literature indicates that heterotrophic biofilms are currently at risk as a result of pesticide stress, the protectiveness of environmental risk assessment in Europe as well as North America is questioned. By briefly outlining substantial knowledge gaps, we provide ideas on how the identified uncertainties may be empirically addressed." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/d18d5d9d8a2cf82c127f517cbb020755> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract Many taxonomic and ecological assemblages of species exhibit a right-skewed body size-frequency distribution when characterized at a regional scale. Although this distribution has been frequently described, factors influencing geographic variation in the distribution are not well understood, nor are mechanisms responsible for distribution shape. In this study, variation in the species body size-frequency distributions of 344 regional communities of North American freshwater fishes is examined in relation to latitude, species richness, and taxonomic composition. Although the distribution of all species of North American fishes is right-skewed, a negative correlation exists between latitude and regional community size distribution skewness, with size distributions becoming left-skewed at high latitudes. This relationship is not an artifact of the confounding relationship between latitude and species richness in North American fishes. The negative correlation between latitude and regional community size distribution skewness is partially due to the geographic distribution of families of fishes and apparently enhanced by a nonrandom geographic distribution of species within families. These results are discussed in the context of previous explanations of factors responsible for the generation of species size-frequency distributions related to the fractal nature of the environment, energetics, and evolutionary patterns of body size in North American fishes." .
<http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/things/articles/97ed11891b2d3bdf2ff22daf2348f2c7> <http://www.springernature.com/scigraph/ontologies/core/abstract> "Abstract The present study provides further data on the occurrence of Pseudoterranova decipiens in fish from two different sampling sites in the Antarctic. A total of 690 fish belonging to 33 species from the eastern Weddell Sea and 322 fish belonging to 12 species from the South Shetland Islands were examined. Altogether, 23 fish species were found to be infested and 11 new host records could be established. P. decipiens occurred at a water depth of between 80 and 820 m. Chaenocephalus aceratus and Notothenia coriiceps from the South Shetland Islands were the species with the highest prevalence (95%) and intensity (2–194 and 1–121, respectively) of infestation. Both are transport hosts, which mainly feed on benthic nototheniid fish species and accumulate the nematodes. Bathypelagic, pelagic, or mainly euphausid feeding fish species were only lightly infested, if at all. This demonstrates the benthic life cycle of P. decipiens in the Antarctic. The preferred site of infestation was the body cavity and the liver; no specimen could be isolated from the fish musculature. This might be explained by the low water temperatures. The infestation of fish from the Weddell Sea was distinctly lower than that of fish around the South Shetland Islands. Besides possible differences in final host populations at the two localities studied, the loss of eggs and larvae under the eastern Weddell Sea shelf ice and over the continental slope and differences in the availability of the first intermediate and macroinvertebrate hosts led to a lower level of infestation. Another role, although nondecisive, may be played by the reduced time of development and infectivity of eggs and larvae, respectively, in the extremely cold waters of the Weddell Sea. P. decipiens is not a rare but, rather a well-established parasite of the Antarctic fauna, which demonstrates the ability of this cosmopolitan species to complete its life cycle even under conditions of subzero temperatures." .
