Abstract In this study, an environmental-friendly modeling system was developed and applied to an agriculture nonpoint source (AGNPS) management in Ulansuhai Nur watershed. In this system, water environmental capacity, credibility-based chance-constrained programming (CCCP), and AGNPS optimization models were integrated into a general modeling framework. It could be used to calculate water environmental capacity of total nitrogen and total phosphorus in Ulansuhai Nur watershed, which could consequentially provide input data for the developed AGNPS optimization model. Also, the inherent uncertainties in estimating water environmental capacities that can be expressed as possibilistic distributions were reflected and addressed based on computational results of three widely used methods. Such uncertainties were consequentially transferred to the proposed CCCP model based on the adoption of multiple credibility satisfactory levels, significantly facilitating objectivity reflection of decision alternatives. The developed modeling system was then applied to Ulansuhai Nur watershed of Inner Mongolia, a semi-arid river basin in northwestern China. Optimal strategies for AGNPS management in Ulansuhai Nur watershed were generated with consideration of the maximum total agricultural income under multiple policy scenarios. The results showed that the total agricultural income would increase with point source pollution being cut down, and would decrease with rising credibility levels, representing decreasing system violation risks. It was indicated that the higher of total nitrogen/phosphorus discharge being less than water environmental capacity of Ulansuhai Nur, the lower the total agriculture incomes. The proposed methods could help decision makers establish various production patterns with cost-effective agriculture nonpoint source management schemes in the basin of Ulansuhai Nur, and gain in-depth insights into the trade-offs between total agricultural incomes and system reliabilities.